PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

Toward  a  Psychociviliz:ed  Society 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comWORLD  PERSPECTIVES 

Volumes already published 

Jacques Maritain 
I  APPROACHES  TO  GoD 
II  AcCENT ON  FoRM 
Lancelot Law Whyte 
III  ScoPE OF  ToTAL ARCHITECTURE  Walter Gropius 
Sarvepalli  Radhakrishnan 
IV  REcoVERY  OF  FAITH 
Konrad Adenauer 
V  WoRLD INDIVISIBLE 
V.  Gordon Childe 
VI  SociETY AND  KNOWLEDGE 
VII  TRE TRANSFORMATIONS  OF  MAN 
Lewis Mumford 
Fred Hoyle 
VIII  MAN  AND  MATERIALISM 
Erich  Fromm 
IX  . THE  ART  oF  LoviNG 
Paul Tillich 
X 
Edmund W. Sinnott 
XI 
XII  MYSTICISM:  CHRISTIAN  AND  BuDDHIST 

DYNAMICS  OF  FAITH 
MATTER,  MIND AND  MAN 

XIII  MAN's  WESTERN  QuEsT 
XIV  AMERICAN  HuMANISM 
XV  THE MEETING  OF  LOVE  AND  KNOWLEDGE 

Daisetz Teitaro Suzuki 
Denis de Rougemont 
Howard  Mumford Jones 

XVI  RICH  LANDS  AND  PooR 

Martin C. D'Ar;cy, S.J. 
Gunnar Myrdal 

XVII  HINDUISM :  ITS  M EANING  FOR  THE  LIBERATION 

OF  THE  SPIRIT 

XVIII  CAN  PEOPLE  LEARN  To  LEARN? 

XIX  PHYSICS  AND  PHILOSOPHY 
XX  ART  AND  REALITY 
XXI  SIGMUND  FREUD's  MisSION 
XXII  MillAGE  OF  HEALTH 
:xxm  IssUES  oF FREEDOM 

_....... 

. 

- Swami N ikhilananda 
Brock  Chisholm 
Werner Heisenberg 
Joyce  Cary 
Erich  Fromm 
Rene  Dubos 
Herbert J.  Muller 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comXXIV  HUMANISM 
XXV  LIFE:  ITs  DIMENSIONS  AND  ITS  BoUNDs 

Moses  Hadas 

Robert M.  Maciver 

XXVI  CHALLENGE  oF  PsYCHICAL  REsEARCH 

Gardner Murphy 

XXVII  ALFRED  NoRTH WHITEHEAD:  His REFLECTIONs 

ON  MAN  AND  NATURE 

XXVIII  THE  AGE  OF  NATIONALISM 

Ruth Nanda Anshen 
Hans  Kohn 
XXIX  VOICES  OF  MAN 
Mario Pei 
XXX  NEw PATHs  IN  BioLOGY 
Adolf Portmann 
Mircea  Eliade 
XXXI  MYTH  AND. REALITY 
XXXII  HISTORY AS  ART AND As SciENCE  H. Stuart Hughes 
XXXIII  REALISM  IN  OuR TIME 
Georg Lukacs 
XXXIV  THE  MEANING  OF  THE  TwENTIETH  CENTURY 

XXXV  ON EcoNOMIC  KNOWLEDGE 
XXXVI  CALIBAN  REBORN 
XXXVII  THROUGH  THE  vANISHING  POINT 

Kenneth  E.  Boulding 
Adolph Lowe 
Wilfrid  Mellers 

XXXVIII  THE  REVOLUTION  oF  HoPE 

Marshall  McLuhan and  Harley  Parker 
Erich  Fromm 
Ignazio  Silone 
XL  MARXISM  AND  THE  ExisTENTIALISTs  Raymond Aron 
XLI  PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

XXXIX  EMERGENCY  ExiT 

Jose  M.  R.  Delgado,  M .D. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comBOARD  OF  EDITORS 

of 

WORLD  PERSPECTIVES 

SIR  KENNETH  CLARK 

RICHARD  CouRANT 

WERNER  HEISENBERG 

IVAN  ILLICH 

KoNRAD  LoRENZ 

RoBERT  M.  MAcivER 

JOSEPH  NEEDHAM 

I.  I.  RABI 

SARVE PALLI  RADHAKRISH NAN 

KARL  RAHNER,  S.J. 

ALEXANDER SACHS 

C.  N.  YANG 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comWORLD  PERSPECTIVES  ·  Volume  Forty-one 

Planned  and  Edited  by  RUTH  NANDA  ANSHEN 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL 
OF  THE . MIND 

Toward  a Psychocivilized Society 

JOSE  M .  R.  DE.LGADO,  M.D. 

~ 1817 

HARPER  &  ROW,  PUBLISHERS 

NEW  YORK,  EVANSTON,  AND  LONDON 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTII.OL  OF  THE  MIND:  TOWARD  A  PSYCHOCIVILIZED  SOCIETY.  Copyright  @ 
1969  by  Jose  M.  R .  Delgado.  All  rights  reserved.  Printed  in  the  United  States 
of  America.  No  part  of  this  book  may  be  used  or  reproduced  in  any  manner 
whatsoever  without  written  permission  except  in  the  case  of  brief  quotations 
embodied in critical articles and  reviews.  For  information  address  Harper & Row, 
Publishers,  Incorporated,  49  East  33rd  Street,  New  York,  N .Y.  10016.  Published 
simultaneously  in  Canada  by  Fitzhenry  &  Whiteside  Limited,  Toronto. 

FIRST  EDITION 

LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS  CATALOG  CARD  NUMBER:  71-89871 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comContents 

WoRLD  PERSPECTIVES-What  This  Series  Means 

-Ruth Nanda Anshen 

Acknowledgments 

Xl 

XlX 

PART  I  MENTAL  EVOLUTION 

1.  Natural Fate Versus Human Control: The Process 

of Ecological  Liberation and Domination 

3 . 

Freedom of Choice 
Awareness 
Responsibility 
Accumulation of Power 

2.  The Imbalance Between Material and Mental 

Evolution 

3·  Mental Liberation and Domination 

PART  II  THE  BRAIN  AND  MIND  AS 
FUNCTIONAL  ENTITIES 

4·  What is  the Mind? 
Mind and Soul 
The Brain Defined 
The Mind as a Functional Entity 
Heterogeneous  Qualities of  the  Mind 
5·  Extracerebral  Elements of the  Mind:  When and 
How the Mind Is Formed 

vii 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comVlll 

CONTENTS 

6.  The Mindless,  Newborn Brain 
7·  Sensory Dependence of the Adult Mind 
8.  Working Hypothesis for the Experimental Study of 

the Mind 

g.  Historical Evolution of Physical  Control  of the 

Brain 

47 
59 

67 

70 

PART III  EXPERIMENTAL CONTROL OF BRAIN 
FUNCTIONS  IN  BEHAVING  SUBJECTS 

76 

81 

97 
100 

117 

10.  Physicochemical Bases of Behavioral Activity 
11.  Methodology  for  Direct  Communication with  the 

Brain 

Implantation of Electrodes in Animals 
Electrodes in the Human Brain 
Two Way Radio Communication with the Brain 

12.  Electrical Stimulation of  the  Brain  (ESB) 
•3·  Motor. Responses 

Motor Activation  in  Animals 
Motor Effects  in Man 

•4·  Hell and Heaven Within the Brain: The Systems for 

Punishment and Reward 

Perception· of Suffering 
Violence Within the Brain 
Anxiety, Fear, and Violence Evoked by ESB in 

Man 

Pleasurable  Excitation of the Animal Brain 
Human Pleasure Evoked  by ESB 
Friendliness and Increased Conversation under 

Electrical  Control 

I5·  Hallucinations, Recollections, and Illusions in Man 
16.  Inhibitory Effectsin Animals and Man 

150 

155 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comCONTENTS 

IX 

PART IV  EVALUATION  OF ELECTRICAL 
CONTROL  OF THE  BRAIN 

17.  Brain Stimulation Triggers Physiological 

Mechanisms 
18.  Electrical Activation of the "Will" 
19. ,Characteristics-and Limitations of Brain Control 

Predictability 
Functional  Monotony 
Skillful  Performance 
Individual Stability 
Technical  Complexity 
Functions Beyond ESB Control 

20.  Medical  Applications 
Diagnosis 
Therapy 
Circumvention of Damaged  Sensory  Inputs 
Brain Viability 

21.  Ethical Considerations 

Clinical Use of New Procedures 
Human Experimentation 
Electrical Manipulation of the Psyche 

22.  Social  Implications 
23~  Neurophysiology and  Mental Activity 

180 
184 
190 

196 

207 

219 
224 

PART V  TOWARD A PSYCHOCIVILIZED SOCIETY 

24.  Social  Dependence  and Individual Freedom 
25.  Natural  Causality  and Intelligent Planning 
26.  A  Tentative  Plan 
Bibliography 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comWorld Perspectives 
What  This  Series  Means 

It is  the  thesis of World Perspectives  that man is  in the process 
of  developing  a  new  consciousness  which,  in  spite  of  his  ap 
parent spiritual and  moral captivity, can eventually  lift the  hu 
man  race above  and  beyond  the  fear,  ignorance,  and  isolation 
which  beset  it today.  It is  to  this  nascent consciousness,  to  this 
concept  of  man  born  out  of  a  universe  perceived  through  a 
fresh  vision  of reality,  that  World  Perspectives  is  dedicated. 

Man  has  entered  a  new  era  of  evolutionary  history,  one  in 
which rapid change is  a  dominant consequence.  He is  contend 
ing with a  fundamental  change,  since  he  has  intervened  in  the 
evolutionary  process.  He  must  now  better  appreciate  this  fact 
and then  develop  the  wisdom  to  direct  the  process  toward  his 
fulfillment  rather  than  toward  his  destruction.  As  he  learns 
to apply  his  understanding  of  the  physical  world  for  practical 
purposes,  he  is,  in  reality,  extending  his  innate  capacity  and 
augmenting his ability and  his  need  to communicate as  well  as 
his  ability  to  think  and  to  create.  And  as  a  result,  he  is  sub 
stituting  a  goal-directed  evolutionary  process  in  his  struggle 
against environmental hardship  for  the  slow,  but effective,  bio 
logical  evolution  which  produced  modern  man  through  muta 
tion  and  natural  selection.  By  intelligent  intervention  in  the 
evolutionary  process  man  has  greatly  accelerated  and  greatly 
expanded the range of his  possibilities.  But he  has  not changed 

xi 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comxu 

WORLD  PERSPECTIVES 

the basic fact  that it remains a  trial and error process,  with  the 
danger of taking paths that lead  to sterility of mind  and heart, 
moral  apathy and  intellectual  inertia;  and  even  producing  so 
cial dinosaurs unfit to live in an evolving world. 

Only  those  spiritual  and  intellectual  leaders  of  our  epoch 
who  have  a  paternity  in  this  extension  of  man's  horizons  are 
invited to participate in this Series:  those  who are aware of the 
truth  that  beyond  the  divisiveness  among  men  there  exists  a 
primordial unitive  power since  we  are all  bound together by a 
common  humanity  more  fundamental  than  any  unity  of 
dogma;  those  who  recognize  that  the  centrifugal  force  which 
has  scattered  and  atomized  mankind  must  be  replaced  by  an 
integrating  structure  and  process  capable  of  bestowing  mean 
ing  and  purpose  on  existence;  those  who  realize  that  science 
itself,  when  not  inhibited  by  the  limitations  of  its  own  meth 
odology,  when  chastened  and  humbled,  commits  man  to  an 
indeterminate range  of  yet  undreamed  consequences  that  may 
flow  from it. 

Virtually  all  of  our  disciplines  have  relied  on  conceptions 
which are now incompatible with the Cartesian axiom, and with 
the static world  view  we  once  derived  from  it.  For  underlying 
the new ideas, including those  of modern physics,  is  a  unifying 
order,  but it is not causality;  it is  purpose,  and not the  purpose 
of the universe and of man but the purpose in the  universe and 
in man. In other words,  we  seem to inhabit a  world of dynamic 
process and structure. Therefore we  need a calculus of potential 
ity rather than one of probability, a  dialectic of polarity, one  in 
which unity and diversity are defined as simultaneous and nec 
essary poles of the same essence. 

Our situation  is  new.  No  civilization  has  previously  had  to 
face  the challenge of scientific  specialization;  an-d  our r esponse 
must be new.  Thus this Series  is  committed  to ensure  that  the 
spiritual  and  moral  needs  of  man  as  a  human  being  and  the 
scientific  and  intellectual  resources  at  his  command  for  life 
may  be  brought  into  a  productive,  meaningful,  and  creative 
harmony. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comWORLD PERSPECTIVES 

Xlll 

This Series endeavors  to point to a  reality of which scientific 
theory  has  revealed  only  one  aspect.  It is  the  commitment  to 
this reality that lends universal intent to a scientist's most origi 
nal  and  solitary  thought.  By  acknowledging  this  frankly  we 
shall restore science to the great family of human aspirations by 
which  men hope  to  fulfill  themselves  in  the  world  community 
as  thinking and sentient beings.  For our problem is  to discover 
a  principle of differentiation and yet relationship lucid enough 
to  justify  and  to  purify  scientific,  philosophic  and  all  other 
knowledge,  both  cognitive  and  intuitive,  by  accepting  their 
interdependence. This is  the crisis  in consciousness  made artic 
ulate  through  the crisis  in science.  This is  the new awakening. 
Each  volume  presents  the  thought  and  belief  of  its  author 
and  points  to  the  way  in  which  religion,  philosophy,  art,  sci 
ence,  economics,  politics and  history  may  constitute  that  form 
of  human  activity  which  takes  the  fullest  and  most  precise 
account  of  variousness,  possibility,  complexity  and  difficulty. 
Thus  World  Perspectives  endeavors  to  define  that  ecumenical 
power  of  the  mind  and  heart  which  enables  man  through  his 
mysterious  greatness  to  re-create  his  life. 

This Series is committed to a  re-examination of all  those sides 
of  human  endeavor  which  the  specialist  was  taught  to  believe 
he could  safely  leave  aside.  It attempts  to  show  the  structural 
kinship  between  subject and object;  the  indwelling of the  one 
in  the  other.  It  interprets  present  and  past  events  impinging 
on human  life  in our growing  World  Age  and envisages  what 
man  may  yet  attain  when  summoned  by  an  unbending  inner 
necessity  to  the  quest of what  is  most  exalted  in  him.  Its  pur 
pose  is  to  offer  new  vistas  in  terms  of  world  and  human  de 
velopment  while  refusing  to  betray  the  intimate  correlation 
between  universality  and  individuality,  dynamics  and  form, 
freedom  and  destiny.  Each  author  deals  with  the  increasing 
realization  that  spirit and  nature  are  not  separate  and  apart; 
that  intuition and reason  must regain  their  importance  as  the 
means of perceiving and fusing  inner being with outer reality. 
World Perspectives endeavors to show  that  the conception of 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comXIV 

WORLD PERSPECTIVES 

wholeness,  unity,  organism  is  a  higher and more  concrete  con 
ception  than  that  of  matter  and  energy.  Thus  an  enlarged 
meaning of life, of biology, not as  it is  revealed  in the test tube 
of the laboratory but as  it is  experienced within  the  organism 
of life  itSelf,  is  attempted  in  this  Series.  For the  principle  of 
life consists in the tension which connects spirit with the realm 
of matter, symbiotically joined. The element of life is dominant 
in  the  very  texture  of  nature, ·thus  rendering  life,  biology,  a 
transempirical  science.  The  laws  of  life  have  their  origin 
beyond their mere physical manifestations and compel us to con 
sider their spiritual source.  In fact,  the widening of the concep 
tual framework has not only served to restore order within  the 
respective  branches  of  knowledge,  but  has  also  disclosed  anal 
ogies  in man's  position regarding  the analysis  and  synthesis  of 
experience in apparently separated domains of knowledge,  sug 
gesting  the  possibility  of  an  ever  more  embracing  objective 
description of the meaning of life. 

Knowledge,  it is  shown in these  books, no longer consists  in 
a manipulation of man and nature as opposite forces,  nor in the 
reduction  of  data  to  mere  statistical  order,  but  is  a  means  of 
liberating mankind  from  the destructive  power of fear,  point 
ing the way  toward the goal of the rehabilitation of the human 
will and the rebifth of faith and confidence  in the human per 
son.  The works  published also  endeavor  to  reveal  that  the  cry 
for patterns, systems and authorities is  growing less  insistent as 
the  desire  grows  stronger  in  both  East  and  West  for  the  re 
covery of a dignity,  integrity and self-realization  which are  the 
inalienable rights of man who may now guide chapge by means 
of conscious purpose in the light of rational experience. 

The volumes in this Series endeavor to demonstrate that only 
in a  society  in which  awareness  of  the  proble~s of science  ex 
ists  can  its  discoveries  start  great  waves  of  change  in  human 
culture,  and  in  such  a  manner  that  these  discoveries  may 
deepen  and  not  erode  the  sense  of  universal  human  commu 
nity.  The  differences  in  the  disciplines,  their  epistemological 
exclusiveness,  the  variety  of  historical  experiences,  the  differ-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comWORLD PERSPECTIVES 

XV 

ences of traditions, of cultures, of languages, of the arts,  should 
be protected and preserved. But the interrelationship and unity 
of the whole should at the same time be accepted. 

The authors of World  Perspectives  are of course  aware that 
the  ultimate  answers  to  the  hopes  and  fears  which  pervade 
modern society rest on the moral  fiber  of man, and on the wis 
dom and responsibility of those who  promote  the course  of its 
development.  But moral  decisions  cannot dispense  with an  in 
sight  into  the 'interplay  of  the  objective  elements  which  offer 
and limit the choices made. Therefore an understanding of what 
the  issues  are,  though  not a  sufficient  condition,  is  a  necessary 
prerequisite for  directing action  toward  constructive solutions. 
Other vital  questions explored relate  to problems of interna 
tional  understanding as well as  to problems dealing with preju 
dice and  the  resultant  tensions  and  antagonisms.  The growing 
perception  and  responsibility  of our  World  Age  point  to  the 
new reality that the individual person and the collective person 
supplement and  integrate each  other;  that  the  thrall  of  totali 
tarianism of both left and right has been shaken in the universal 
desire  to  recapture  the authority of  truth and  human  totality. 
Mankind can finally  place its trust not in a  proletarian authori 
tarianism,  not  in a  secularized  humanism,  both of which  have 
betrayed  the spiritual  property right of history,  but in a  sacra 
mental  brotherhood and  in  the  unity of knowledge.  This new 
consciousness  has  created  a  widening  of  human  horizons  be 
yond  every  parochialism,  and  a  revolution  in  human thought 
comparable to the basic assumption, among the ancient Greeks, 
of the  sovereignty  of  reason;  corresponding  to  the  great efful 
gence  of  the  moral  conscience  articulated  by  the  Hebrew 
prophets;  analogous  to  the  fundamental  assertions  of  Chris 
tianity; or to the beginning of the new scientific era,  the era of 
the science of dynamics, the experimental foundations of which 
were laid by Galileo in the Renaissance. 

An  important  effort  of this  Series  is  to  re-examine  the  con 
tradictory meanings and applications  which  are given  today  to 
such  terms as  democracy, freedom,  justice, love,  peace,  brother-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comXVI 

WORLD PERSPECTIVES 

hood  and  God.  The  purpose  of such  inquiries  is  to  clear  the 
way for the foundation of a  genuine world history not in terms 
of nation or race or culture  but in terms of man in relation  to 
God,  to  himself,  his  fellow  man  and  the  universe,  that  reach 
beyond  immediate self-interest.  For  the  meaning of  the World 
Age consists  in respecting man's  hopes  and dreams  which  lead 
to a deeper understanding of the basic values of all peoples. 

World Perspectives is  planned to gain insight into the mean 
ing of man, who not only is determined by history but who also 
determines  history.  History  is  to  be  understood  as  concerned 
not  only with  the  life  of  man  on  this  planet  but as  including 
also such cosmic influences as  interpenetrate our human world. 
This generation is discovering that history does not conform to 
the social optimism of modem civilization and that the organi 
zation of human communities and the establishment of freedom 
and  peace  are  not  only  intellectual  achievements  but spiritual 
and moral achievements as  well, demanding a  cherishing of the 
wholeness  of  human  personality,  the  "unmediated  wholeness 
of feeling  and  thought,"  and constituting a  nevercending  chal 
lenge  to man,  emerging from  the abyss  of meaninglessness  and 
suffering,  to  be renewed  and replenished  in  the  totality of his 
life. 

Justice  itself,  which  has  been  "in a  state  of  pilgrimage  and 
crucifixion" and now is being slowly liberated from  the grip of 
social  and  political  demonologies  in  the  East  as  well  as  in  the 
West, begins to question its  own premises. The modem revolu 
tionary  movements  which  have  challenged  the  sacred  institu 
tions  of society  by  protecting  social  in justice  in  the  name  of 
social  justice are here  examined and re-evaluated. 

In the light of this,  we  have no choice  but tc;,>_  admit that  the 
unfreedom against which freedom is measured must be retained 
with it, namely,  that the aspect of truth out of which the night 
view  appears  to  emerge,  the  darkness  of  our  time,  is  as  little 
abandonable  as  is  man's  subjective  advance.  Thus  the  two 
sources of man's consciousness are inseparable,  not as  dead  but 
as  living and  complementary,  an  aspect  of  that  "principle  of 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comWORLD PERSPECTIVES 

XVll 

complementarity"  through  which  Niels  Bohr  has  sought  to 
unite the quantum and the wave,  both of which constitute  the 
very fabric of life's radiant energy.  · 

There is in mankind today a  counterforce to the sterility and 
danger  of  a  quantitative,  anonymous  mass  culture;  a  new,  if 
sometimes  imperceptible, spiritual sense of convergence  toward 
human and wof1d  unity on  the  basis  of  the sacredness  of  each 
human  person  and respect  for  the  plurality of cultures.  There 
is  a  growing awareness  that  equality  may  not  be  evaluated  in 
mere  numerical  tetms  but  is  proportionate  and  analogical  in 
its  reality.  For when  equality  is  equated with  interchangeabil 
ity, individuality is negated and the human person extinguished. 
We stand at the brink of an age  of a  world in which human 
life  presses  forward  to  actualize  new  forms.  The  false  separa 
tion  of  man  and  nature,  of  time  and  space,  of  freedom  and 
security,  is  acknowledged,  and we  are  faced  with  a  new  vision 
of man  in his  organic  unity  and  of  history  offering  a  richness 
and diversity of quality and majesty of scope  hitherto  unprece 
dented.  In relating the accumulated wisdom  of  man's  spirit  to 
the  new  reality  of  the  World  Age,  in  articulating  its  thought 
and belief,  World Perspectives seeks  to encourage a  renaissance 
of hope in society and of pride in man's decision as  to what his 
destiny will be. 

World  Perspectives  is  committed  to  the  recognition  that all 
great changes are preceded by a  vigorous intellectual re-evalua 
tion and reorganization.  Our authors are aware  that  the  sin of 
hubris  may  be  avoided  by  showing  that  the  creative  process 
itself is  not a  free  activity  if by free  we  mean arbitrary, or un 
related  to  cosmic  law.  For  the  creative  process  in  the  human 
mind,  the  developmental  process  in  organic  nature  and  the 
basic laws of the inorganic realm may be but varied expressions 
of  a  universal  formative  process.  Thus  World  Perspectives 
hopes  to  show  that although  the  present  apocalyptic  period  is 
one of exceptional tensions,  there is  also at work an exceptional 
movement  toward  a  compensating  unity  which  refuses  to  vio 
late  the  ultimate  moral  power  at  work  in  the  universe,  that 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comXV Ill 

WORLD PERSPECTIVES 

very  power  upon which  all  human effort must  at last  depend. 
In  this  way  we  may  come  to  understand  that  there  exists  an 
inherent  independence  of spiritual  and  mental  growth  which, 
though  conditioned  by  circumstances,  is  never  determined  by 
circumstances.  In this  way the great plethora of human  knowl 
edge may be correlated with an insight into the nature of human 
nature by being attuned to the wide and deep range of human 
thought and human experience. 

Incoherence  is  the  result  of  the  present  disintegrative  proc 
esses  in  education.  Thus  the  need  for  World  Perspectives  ex 
presses  itself  in  the  recognition  that  natural  and  man-made 
ecological  systems  require  as  much  study  as  isolated  particles 
and  elementary  reactions.  For  there  is  a  basic  correlation  of 
elements in nature as in man which cannot be separated, which 
compose  each  other  and alter  each  other  mutually.  Thus  we 
hope  to  widen  appropriately  our  conceptual  framework  of 
reference. For our epistemological problem consists in our find 
ing  the  proper  balance  between  our  lack  of  an  all-embracing 
principle  relevant  to  our  way  of  evaluating  life  and  in  our 
power  to  express  ourselves  in  a  logically  consistent  manner. 
In spite of the infinite obligation of men and in spite of their 
finite  power,  in spite of the  intransigence of nationalisms,  and 
in  spite  of  the  homelessness  of  moral  passions  rendered  inef 
fectual  by the technological outlook,  beneath the apparent tur 
moil and upheaval of the present, and out of the transformations 
of this dynamic period with the unfolding of a  world-conscious 
ness,  the  purpose of  World Perspectives  is  to  help quicken  the 
"unshaken  heart  of  well-rounded  truth"  and  interpret  the 
significant elements of the World Age now taking shape out of 
the  core  of  that  undimmed  continuity of  the  creativ~ process 
which  restores  man  to  mankind  while  deepening and  enhanc 
ing his communion with the universe. 

RuTH  NANDA  ANSHEN 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comAcknowledgments 

Since  the  beginning  of  my  studies  at  the  Madrid  School  of 
Medicine,  I  have  been  inspired  by  the  memory of  the  Spanish 
histologist Santiago Ramon y Cajal and by his conception of the 
central  nervous  system,  his  penetrating  advice  about  how  to 
conduct  scientific  research,  and  his  philosophical  ideas  about 
life  and  death.  Sixty-five  years  ago,  Cajal  said  that  knowledge 
of  the  physicochemical  basis  of  memory,  feelings,  and- reason 
would  make  man  the  true  master  of  creation,  that  his  most 
transcendental accomplishment would be the conquering of his 
own brain. 

My  personal  background  is  the usual  rather  specialized  one 
of a  biologist, but I  have been compelled to venture beyond the 
limits of my science  by  the  need  to  evaluate  the  experimental 
reality  of  motor  behavior  and  mental  phenomena  directed 
by  electrical  and  chemical  stimulation  of  functioning  brains. 
I  have also felt  the anxiety of our age,  which  requires a  better 
understanding of the cosmological situation of man in order  to 
give  a  rational  and  emotional  purpose  to  human  life;  and  I 
have  been  concerned  by  the  urgent  need  to  resolve  archaic 
human antagonisms and to find a new conviviality based on bio 
logical reality rather  than on  wishful  thinking.  As  T.  M.  Hes 
burg, president of Notre Dame  University,  has said,  "Scientists 
cannot  be  neutral."  We  must  understand  the  social  responsi 
bility attached  to  our research and the moral  impact  it has  on 
the world of men,  including ourselves.  At least there is  novelty 

xix 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comXX 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

in  looking  at  behavioral  manifestations  not  from  outside  the 
organism  but from  inside  the spiking neurons  where  informa 
tion is interpreted and responses are organized. 

This  book  was  begun  during  a  sabbatical  leave  of  absence 
from Yale  University under a  Guggenheim  Fellowship.  Part of 
its content was presented at the New York Academy of Sciences 
in December  1968  as  Salmon  Lectures.  Dr.  Paul Weiss'  Rocke 
feller  University evaluation of the  preliminary manuscript was 
very  helpful.  Economic  support  for  my  research  has  been 
provided  by  grants  from  Foundations'  Fund  for  Research  in 
Psychiatry, United States Public Health Service,  Office of Naval 
Research, United States Air Force 6571st Aeromedical Research 
Laboratory,  NeuroResearch  Foundation,  and  Spanish  Council 
for Scientific Education. The experimental material originating 
in my laboratory has  been the work  of a  group of investigators 
from  different countries to  whom  I  express my warm apprecia 
tion.  Their names are  mentioned in our  published  work.  Our 
most recent collaborators included Dr. Lembit Allikmets  (Esto 
nia, USSR), Dr. Humberto Bracchitta (Chile), Dr. Ronald Brad 
ley  (U:Q.ited  Kingdom),  Dr.  Francis DeFeudis  (USA),  Dr.  Taiji 
Hanai  (Japan),  Dr.  Victor  Johnson  (United  Kingdom),  Dr. 
Diego  Mir  (Spain),  Dr.  Rodney  Plotnik  (USA),  Dr.  Maria 
Luisa Rivera  (Spain),  Dr.  Chico Vas  (India)  and  Dr.  Jan Wal 
lace  (USA). 

Ideas and reciprocal  influences  exchanged  with  my  brothers, 
Rafael  and  Alberto,  through  the  years  have  been  important 
to  the structuring of my own  mind;  the  many enjoyable  hours 
of  discussion  with  my  wife,  Caroline,  who  has  been  a  close, 
sensitive, and intelligent collaborator, have been decisive in the 
creation of this  book. 

The Salmon Lectures of the New York Academy of Medicine 
were  established  in  1931  as  a  memorial  to  Thomas  William 
Salmon,  M.D.,  and  for  the  advancement  of  the  objectives  to 
which his professional career had been wholly devoted. 

Dr. Salmon died in  1927, at the age of fifty-one,  after a  career 
of  extraordinary service  in  psychiatric  practice  and  education, 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

XXl 

and  in  the  development  of  a  world-wide  movement  for  the 
better  treatment  and  prevention  of  mental  disorders,  and  for 
the promotion of mental  health. 

This  volume  in  World  Perspectives  had  its  original  source 
in  the  invitation  ex tended  to  me  in  1963  by  Dr.  Ruth  Nanda 
Anshen  to write a  volume for  World  Perspectives  Series which 
she  plans and edits.  The Salmon Lectures  I  gave  in  1g68  were 
based on the  text of a  part of this volume. 

Jose  M. R .  Delgado,  M .D. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPART  I 

MENTAL  EVOLUTION 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com1 

Natural Fate  Versus  Human  Control: 

The  Process  of Ecological 

Liberation  and Domination 

Manifestations of life depend on a  continuous  interplay of nat 
ural forces.  Worms and elephants, mosquitoes and eagles,  plank 
ton  and  whales  display  a  variety  of  activities  on  the  land,  in 
the  air,  and  in  the  sea  with  a  purpose..-:or  lack  of  it-which 
escapes human understanding, obeying sets  of laws  which  ante 
date  the  appearance  of  human  intelligence. 

In  the animal  kingdom,  existence  of  the  genetic  code  repre 
sents  a  biological  determination  of  anatomical  and  functional 
characteristics  in  the  newborn.  The  growth  and  development 
of organisms after birth proceed according to a  natural fate im 
posed  by  the  correlations  between  individual  structure  and 
environmental  circumstances.  The  fact  that about  300  million 
years  ago  all  the world's  creatures  lived  in  the  sea  did  not  de 
pend  on  their  own  volition  but  on  biological  evolution  and 
ecological  factors.  The  appearance  of  dinosaurs  180  million 
years ago  in the Triassic  period,  their supremacy on earth, and 
their peak in power 30 million years later were determined not 
· by the will of these animals, which had disproportionately small 
brains  and  were  probably ·rather  stupid,  but  by  a  propitious 
warm  and  sticky  climate  which  provided  a  soft  slosh  of water 
everywhere  and  land  covered  with  a  tangle  of  greenery,  juicy 

3 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

4 
palms,  and  huge  fernlike  trees  extending almost  to  the  North 
Pole. 

The catastrophic end of the age of gigantic reptiles was simply 
the result of their  inability  to adapt  themselves  to  a  change  in 
weather and lack of food.  At the  beginning of the  Cenozoic  era 
70  million years  ago,  the air was  drier  and  cooler  than  before. 
High  plains  emerged  from  shallow  seas  and  ponds,  and  hard 
wood £~rests towered in place of ferns and palms. This changing 
ecology  was  unsuitable  for  dinosaurs  and  because  they  lacked 
the intelligence  to  understand their situation,  to  improve  their 
food  supply,  or  to  modify  their  diet,  natural  fate  forced  these 
giants into extinction,  and in  their  place  small,  warm-blooded, 
furry mammals slowly grew in size and number. 

The appearance of man approximately one million years ago 
meant only  the  flourishing  of one  more  kind  of animal  which 
shared  with  the  others  most  biological  laws  and  a  complete 
dependence  on  natural  forces.  Men,  like  elephants  and  frogs, 
possessed  lungs,  bones,  and  brains;  pumping  of  blood  by  the 
heart and other physiological  phenomena were-and still are 
very similar  in  all  mammals,  and  proceeded  according  to  pre 
established mechanisms beyond awareness  or voluntary control. 
Personal  destiny  was  determined  by  a  series  of  biological  and 
environmental  circumstances  which  could  not  be  foreseen, 
understood, · or  modified.  Natural  fate  meant  that  man,  along 
with all animals, suffered the inclemencies of the weather, being 
decimated  by  cold  temperatures,  ·starvation,  and  all  kinds  of 
parasites and illnesses.  He did  not know  how  to  make a  fire  or 
a  wheel,  and he was  not yet  able  to  influence  the  functions  of 
his own body or to modify his  environment. 

A decisive  step in the evolution of man  and  in the establish 
ment  of  his  superiority  over  other  living  creatures""' was  his 
gradual  achievement of ecological  liberation.  Why should man 
accept  unnecessary  hardships?  Why  should  he  be  wet  because 
the rain was  falling,  or cold because  the sun was  hidden,  or be 
killed because predators were hungry? Why should he not cover 
his  body  with  the  soft  skins  of  animals,  construct  tools  and 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comNATURAL  FATE  VERSUS  HUMAN  CONTROL 

5 

shelter,  collect  food  and  water?  Slowly  the  first  sparks  of  in 
telligence began to challenge natural fate.  Herds of cattle were 
a more reliable source of food  than hunting in the forest.  Some 
fields were stripped of the vegetation which was growing accord 
ing  to  capricious  ecological  destiny,  and  were  placed  under 
cultivation by man. 

Attention  was  gradually  directed  toward  the  human  body, 
and  skills  were  learned  for  the  treatment  of injuries.  Broken 
limbs  no  longer  meant  permanent  disfunction  but  could  be 
repaired  by  transitory  application  of  branches  tied  with  vege~ 
table  fibers.  Personal  experience  was  not  lost,  but  could  be 
transmitted  from  generation  to  generation;  the  accumulating 
culture  preserved  through  a  gradually  elaborated  spoken  and 
written  language  represented  a  continuous  advance  of civili 
zation.  Men  learned  to  work  together,  to  exchange  skills  and 
knowledge,  and  to  join  their  efforts  to  improve  their  circum 
stances. Curiosity grew continuously, and endless questions were 
formulated  about  the  observed  reality.  Ecological  liberation 
could progress not by hiding inside caves but by facing  dang~r, 
and man challenged the immense power of natural forces,  using 
a lever to lift weights heavier than muscular power could man 
age,  tricking the wind to  push sailing ships  through  the  ocean, 
and  taming the rivers  to  turn  the  grinding stones  of  the  mills. 
Thus -began  the  process  of  man's  ecological  domination,  the 
victory of human intelligence over the fate of a mindless nature 
-'-a  victory  without  precedent  in  the  history  of  other  animal 
species.  Biological  adaptation  enabled  man  to  survive  under 
extreme climatic conditions  including arctic  areas,  dry deserts, 
high altitudes,  and hot  tropics,  but  it was  the  intellectual  and 
material  development of civilization  that really  brought about 
the present degree of ecological liberation and domination. The 
winning of a considerable degree of independence from natural 
elements  permitted  human  beings  to  direct  their  intelligence 
and  energy  toward  endeavors  more  interesting  than  mere  sur 
vival. The signs of man's power slowly extended throughout the 
world,  transforming  the  earth's  surface  with  cultivated  fields, 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com6 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

with  cities, and with roads;  joining oceans;  tunneling  through 
mountains;  harnessing  atomic  power;  and  reaching  for  the 
stars.  In spite of the problems associated  with  the development 
of civilization,  the  fact  is  that  today  the  charting  of  our  lives 
depends  more  on  intelligent  decisions  than  on  ecological  cir 
cumstances.  The  surrounding  medium · of  modern  societies 
is  not nature,  as  in the  past,  but buildings,  machines,  and cul 
ture,  which  are  man-made  products.  Modern  medicine  has 
created a  healthier  environment  by reducing  infant  mortality, 
diminishing the  number and gravity  of illnesses,  and  consider 
ably  increasing  the  span  of  life.  According  to  the  biological 
law  of  only a  few  centuries  ago,  pestilence  desolated  mankind 
from  time  to  time,  insects  spread infections,  more  than  half  of 
the  newborn  died  before  the  age  of  three,  old  age  began  at 
thirty or forty,  and only a  minority survived  to  the age of fifty. 
Scientific  knowledge  has  modified  our  own  biology,  providing 
better  diet,  hygienic  practices,  and  pharmacological  and  sur 
gical  treatment. 

Viewing evolution  in  terms  of  the  opposition  of  human  in 
telligence  to  natural  fate  has  a  dramatic  appeal  which  empha 
sizes · the relative importance of each factor in the determination 
of events. In reality, however, we should accept the fact  that the 
existence  of  man;  together  with  all  of  his  attributes  and  crea 
tions, including his own ecological liberation and domination, is 
actually and inescapably the result of natural fate.  Man did not 
invent  man.  No  conscious  efforts  were  ever  made  to  design-- 
or modify-the anatomical  structure of  his  brain.  Because  the 
development  of wings  was  a  result  of  biological  evolution,  we 
cannot claim that birds have liberated themselves from the pull 
of gravity by flying  in the  air  in  defiance  of natural  laws.  The 
fact  that  birds  fly  means  that  they  have  achieved  one  step  of 
ecological  liberation,  escape  from  gravity  by  using  the  lifting 
support of the wind.  Birds can live and play in the air above all 
other  earthbound  creatures.  Their  wings  were  a  gracious  gift 
of evolution which did not require knowledge of physics, mathe 
matiCal  calculations,  or  even  the  desire  to  own  wings.  Nature 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comNATURAL  FATE  VERSUS  HUMAN  CONTROL 

7 
seems  to be highly imaginative but excessively slow;  many mil 
lions of years  passed  from  the  beginning of life on earth  to the 
appearance  of flying  animals.  The  period  from  the  emergence 
of the human mind to  the invention of the airplane was  much 
shorter.  The  tremendous  acceleration  in  accomplishments  was 
determined by the development of the unique powers of imagi 
nation and reason;-and it may  be  expected that human  inven 
tions  will  have  an  increasing  role  in  the  control  of  activities 
on earth. Birds fly,  and man thinks.  Liberation from  and domi 
nation of many natural elements have changed ecology,  and are 
also  influencing  the  needs,  purpose,  and  general  organization 
of human life,  especially  in the  following aspects. 

Freedom  of Choice 

In contrast with  the limitations  felt  by our ancestors  and by 
members  of  still  primitive  societies,  we  enjoy  nearly  endless 
possibilities to pursue interests and activities of our own choice. 
Modern  life  is  not  bound  by  the  physical  restrictions  of  geog 
raphy;  our  voices  can  be  transmitted  with  the  speed  of  light 
to  anyone  around  the  world;  on  television  we  can  see  events 
in any country as  they actually  occur;  and we can  travel  to dis 
tant lands at supersonic speeds.  We are not limited in food  in 
take  by  our  hunting  skills.  Instead,  we  may  have  available  a 
variety  of supermarkets which display  the culinary  products  of 
many  countries.  In  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  we  are  no 
longer limited to verbal contact, but have access to many centers 
of learning equipped  with  increasingly  effective  teaching  aids, 
where  the  different  aspects  of  man's  recorded  history  are  col 
lected and  preserved ..  We can  select  from  a  wide  variety of en 
tertainment,  careers,  ideas,  and religions.  Even parenthood can 
be planned, and the birth of children controlled,  by  the use  of 
medical  knowledge  and  contraceptive  devices. 

Today  our  activities  are  less  determined  by  adaptation  to 
nature than by the ingenuity and foresight of the human mind 
which recently has added another dimension  to  its spectrum of 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com8 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

choices-the  possibility  of  investigating  its  own  physical  and 
chemical  substratum.  Limitation and  regimentation  of our  ac 
tivities  are  imposed  mainly  by  education,  legislation,  social 
pressure,  and  finance~which are  creations  of  civilization 
rather  than  by  environmental  determination,  as  was  formerly 
the  case.  Civilized  man  has  surrounded  himself  with  a  multi 
tude of instruments which  magnify  his  senses,  skills,  strengths, 
and the speed with which he can  travel,  without realizing,  per 
haps,  that in his drive to be free  from  natural  elements,  he was 
creating a  new kind of servitude dominated by levers,  engines, 
currency,  and  computers.  The  concerns  of  earlier  times  for 
crops  and  predators  were  supplanted  by  economic  worries,  in 
dustrial  problems,  and  the  threat  of  atomic  overkill.  Despite 
the tremendous  increase  in  possible  courses  of action,  the  free 
dom an individual enjoys is  becoming more  tied  to mechaniza 
tion which is  replacing  the  natural  environment as  a  determi 
nant  of  behavior.  Liberation  from  ecology  is  paralleled  by  a 
mechanized dependence which absorbs considerable manpower 
for  the  invention,  construction,  and  maintenance  of  machines. 
The possibility of independent behavior is certainly contingent 
on the availability of different paths of conduct. But the element 
most essential  to its achievement is  awareness  of  the  many  fac 
tors  influencing  our actions  in  order  to  assure  us  that  opr  re 
sponses  will  not be automatic,  but deliberate  and  personal.  As 
Rene Dubos, has said,  "The need to choose  is  perhaps the most 
constant  aspect  of conscious  human  life;  it constitutes  both  its 
greatest asset  and  its  heaviest  burden"  (6g). • 

Awareness 

The qualities which most distinctlfseparate man  from other 
animals are the awareness of his own existence and the capacity 
to resist  and  even  change  what  appears  to  be  his  natural  fate. 
The  degree  of  individual  awareness  differs  according  to  per-

•  Numbers  in  parentheses  refer  to  sources  listed  in  the  Bibliography  at  the 

back  of this  book. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comNATURAL  FATE  VERSUS  HUMAN  CONTROL 

9 

sonal circumstances.  Consciousness is a  rather expensive luxury 
in terms of time and effort.  and we  use  it sparingly while  per 
forming many daily tasks  based on complex series of automatic 
responses.  Walking.  for  example,  requires  a  tedious  process 
of motor learning in early life,  but once the necessary  cerebral 
formulas  for controlling movements  have  been established.  we 
pay  no  attention  to  the  onset,  strength,  speed.  timing.  and  se 
quences of muscular performance; we simply stand up and walk 
while  our  minds  are  occupied  with  other  thoughts.  All  these 
processes are automatic and.  to a  considerable extent.  are char 
acteristic of each  individual.  We can,  however,  refocus  our at 
tention  on  any  motor  aspect  of  walking  and  re-educate  and 
modify  the motor formulas  to improve the elegance  and grace 
fulness  of movement, or to mimick  the  gait of sailors.  tramps. 
or cowboys.  as  actors do. 

Stopping  at a  red  light does  not require  a  decision  because 
we  are  highly  trained and conditioned  to  perform  this  action. 
If we  pause  to analyze  our behavior,  we  may  be  aware  of  the 
motor  activity  involved  in  stepping  on  the  brakes  and  of  ~he 
reasons that we are stopping and obeying the traffic rules which 
only  then  may  be  questioned  or  even  ignored.  Choice  is  not 
involved in automatic responses,  but if we appraise  the reasons 
and  circumstances  surrounding  our  actions.  new  avenues  of 
response  are  created.  This  applies  to  emotional  reactions  and 
social behavior as  well as  to motor activity. 

Awareness  is  increased  by  knowledge  of  the  mechanisms  of 
the  considered  phenomenon.  For  instance.  an  expert  is  likely 
to  notice  any  peculiar  car  engine  noises.  perceiving  auditory 
signals which may not be detected by untrained drivers.  Knowl 
edge of the structure and mechanisms of the motor improves the 
probability  of  foreseeing  and  preventing  possible  breakdowns 
and also  of correcting malfunctioning parts. 

To a considerable degree.  our behavior is  composed of auto 
matic responses to sensory inputs, but if we knew the genetic de 
terminants.  cultural  elements.  and  intracerebral  mechanisms 
involved in various  kinds of behavioral performance, we could 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com10 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

come  closer  to  understanding  the  motivations  underlying  our 
actions.  If we were cognizant of the  factors  influencing our be 
havior,  we could accept or reject many of  them  and  minimize 
their effects  upon us.  The result would be a  decrease in autom 
atism and an increase in the deliberate quality of our responses 
to  the  environment.  Awareness  introduces  greater  individual 
responsibility  in  behavioral activities. 

Responsibility 

Primitive man did not have the choice of going to the movies, 
reading a  book,  or watching  television.  He  was  fully  occupied 
searching for  food  and fighting  for  survival.  Today's  many  be 
havioral  alternatives  require  that  we  make  a  conscious  effort 
to  understand  and  evaluate  the  different  possibilities,  perhaps 
to  modify or repress  emotional  reactions  to  them,  and  finally, 
to  select a  course  of action.  In  many cases,  these  processes  are 
performed at  the  subconscious  level,  and responses  flow  effort 
lessly;  at other times we  are aware of an  impending act  and  its 
possible alternatives,  and arriving at a  decision  may be difficult 
and  tiring.  The conscious  selection  of  one  path  among  many 
places  greater  responsibility  on  the  individual  because  his  ac 
tivities  are  not  determined  by  automatic  mechanisms  or  ex 
ternal factors  beyond his control.  Intelligent judgment is  based 
on an individual's personal qualities and especially on his ability 
to  evaluate  possible  solutions.  Individual  choice  entails  assum 
ing accountability for the direction of personal destiny, and the 
greater  one's  awareness  and  freedom,  the  greater  the  responsi 
bility.  In a  small social  group such as  a  tribe,  the consequences 
of  the  leader's  choice  are  rather  limited,  while  in  highly  or 
ganized  contemporary  societies,  the  decisions  of  governmental 
elites will  affect large numbers of people.  The  political  actions 
of  these  powerful  officials  concerning  foreign  aid,  cultural  ex 
change,  and  peace  and war  will  affect  life  in  most  parts of . the 
world.  We  should  remember  that  decision-making  always  in' 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comNATURAL  FATE  VERSUS  HUMAN  CONTROL 

11 

volves the activity of intracerebral mechanisms which, as  yet, are 
little known. 

Accumulation  of  Power 

Industrial  and  technological  developments  have  created  un 
paralleled resources with immense constructive and destructive 
potentials. Already we have conquered the natural obstacles  of 
rivers, seas, and mountains, and they are no longer insurmount 
able barriers to the activities of man. At the same time, we have 
accumulated megatons of atomic energy capable of obliterating 
all forms  of life in the world. 

Instruments  have  been  invented  to  increase  a  millionfold 
the  perceptivity  of our senses,  the  power  of our  muscles,  and 
our ability to process information. In addition to increasing our 
material  power,  we  have  greatly  improved  our capacity  to  or 
ganize  and  use  available  resources.  Plans  for  the  development 
of  cities,  industries,  research,  education,  and  the  economy  in 
general  are  carefully  formulated  by  experts,  and  these  plans 
are essential  for  the organization and evolution of our society. 
These  developments again  introduce  the question  of responsi 
bility in the choice of objectives  to be reached.  Because  of the 
magnitude of our material and intellectual powers, the directive 
resolutions  made  by  elite  groups  may  be  decisive  for  the  de 
velopment of scientific and economic fields  of endeavor, for the 
evolution of civilization in general,  and for  the  very existence 
of man. 

Major nations are constantly faced  with the choice of how to 
use  power,  and conscious  efforts  are  made  to  reach  intelligent 
decisions  which  are  expressed  as  national  goals  such  as  over 
coming poverty, landing a  man on the moon, or meeting time 
tables  for  industrial,  agricultural,  and  scientific  development. 
Because our resources  are not unlimited,  a  major effort  in one 
field,  such as armaments or outer space exploration, restricts the 
development  of  other  less-favored  areas.  The  application  of 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

human energy to the control of natural forces  is  continually in 
creasing. and perhaps it is  time to ask if the present orientation 
of our civilization is desirable and sound. or whether we should 
re-examine the universal goals of mankind and pay more atten 
tion to the primary objective, which should not be the develop 
ment of machines,  but of man himself. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com2 

The-Imbalance Between 

Material  and Mental  Evolution 

Originally,  philosophy  and  science  were  unified  in  purpose, 
which  was,  in  the  words  of  Plato,  "the  vision  of  truth."  They 
were also  unified in their methodological exploration of reality, 
which  consisted  of  observation  and  rational  interpretation  of 
what  was  observed.  This  happy  marriage  persisted  for  many 
centuries  until  ideological  and technological  revolutions  intro 
duced new methodologies and the need for greater specialization. 
Unable  to  resolve  the  developing  differences  in  outlook  and 
method,  philosophy  and  science  separated  from  one  another, 
tearing apart what had been  their common subject  of inquiry. 
Philosophers and  theologians  carried with  them  the  mind and 
soul;  scientists  kept  matter  and  the  body,  and  psychologists  as 
newcomers lived for some time a schizokinetic existence between 
spirit  and  substance,  without  enough  scientific  recognition  or 
philosophical support. 

Mathematics,  physics,  and  chemistry  became  increasingly 
important fields  of study,  and  the  application  of experimental 
methods to  biology  was so  fruitful  that  the interest of scholars 
was  diverted  from  philosophy  to science.  Why should  time  be 
spent  in  semantic  fencing  and  speculations  when  important 
questions could be asked directly of living organisms, rocks, and 
celestial  bodies?  Telescopes  and microscopes  explored  opposite 
aspects  of the natural world,  and organic compounds were  syn-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com14 

'PHYSip.t.LPtiNTROL  OF  THE ' MINI> 

-~~~~~!~ro; 

onJ.yt_:rh,f~l1gb'.'·tJl~ senses .• Psychological·· investigations -analyzed -

~es:t?f mt':ntiitd; SiitjJiisingly enough; most investigators-

iit!~~~~~~g:~ 
~~~1!t=~b::!ft:t~~=~~:;: 8!:U:~~~li~~ 
wittr sl~J'Yin~~~'they Uliloo-to take into accoufit the mental 
eompi~ty,~£: tll¢w.ikitlgJmlin. - · 
-_ 1rll~-c6Iifi'aSfbetween the' f.lst pace ofte&nological evolution 
arid oti~Jifu1t~- advat1ces  m tb-e  understanding and  control of 
bunian '~haV'i<>i is creating_ a  growing  danger.  We  are  facing 
a -~irilation:~-itl  ~biclr 'vast  amounts  of  aq:uuiulated  de5tnictive -
-power 'ate at the diSposal of'b:tains. whiCh. have not yet learned  
td ,bt ' Wise · enort@f'~to solve· econom-ic  conflicts  and  ideological 
antftgomsrliMintellig~tly. The  "balance  of terror"  existing  in 
the prescmfwbri~t reflects the discrepancy  between the awesome 
technology ai'ld the underdeveloped -wisdom of man: 

_ 

_ 

We'· may - t~call  that  many  millenniums  ago,  during  the 
Jttia~it pe:ri<xl,  the  gigantic  brontosauti,  weighing  thirty  toils 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comIMBALANCE  BETWEEN  MATERIAL  AND  MENTAL  EVOLUTION  15 

and extending over  seventy  feet  in  length,  reached  their  peak 
of power.  With their long necks and tails  they probably moved 
gracefully  in  the  water,  but  on  land  they  were  clumsy  and 
consumed large amounts of energy just in moving their weight 
;:rround,  Judged  by  fossil  hones dis(:overed  in  Colorado  and 
-Wyoming, their brute force was overwhelming, but this extraor 
dinary  physical  power  was . directed  by  tiny . bx:ains  weighing 
Jess  than 0.5  kilograms.  The  orga'n~tion of im:oming  signals 
and outgoing: messages  to  keep 4:hese  h11ge  :frame_s  in  working 
order  must  have  occupied  most  of -theU:. h.-aim. · leaving  litde 
.opportunity  for  more  intelligent' and 'adaptive ,behavio:r.  The 
brontosauri became extinct because of- their eXtremely  limited 
mental -powers;  faced  with ·an increa5inglyunfavorable climate 
and diminishing food  supply,  these' animals were :-incapable  of 
adaptation and could not survive in the changing environment. 
The fate of these giants may have synJ.bolic valuefQr twentieth 
- century civilization, which is  also  attempting _ to direct tremen 
~ous potential with disproportionately small -- brains. While our 
mefl:~:aLfaculties are incompanbly superior ·t:O  those of the early 
land animals, we still lack adequate-self-knowledge and control, 
and  natural  history  teaches  that  when  underdeveloped  brains 
• are in charge of great power,  the result -is extinction.  Methods 
for  the re-education and control  o_f  social  antagonisms and un 
desirable emotional manifestations in IJWl· are u:rgendy needed. 
While  these  processes  are  obviously  related  to  environmental 
:.·circumstances,  they also depend on the activity ofintracerebral 
mechanisms,  which  should  be  better · knoWil;.- When -primitive 
''fuim  faced natural catastrophes like flocxls  or ~tilence, he was 
helpless  and -reacted  with resignation~ despair,  or an appeal  to 
supernatural  powers.  In  contrast,  modem  man,  being  more 
perceptive, may decide to study his circumstances and apply his 
power and intelligence to the immediate prQblem;  by construct 
ing  dikes  or  vaccinating  the  population,  he  may  prevent  or 
'modify the forces of natural causality. It is reasonable to assume 
that just as  more  knowledge  of  natural  meehanisms  allows  us 
to use and control natural forces,  a clearer understanding of the 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

central  nervous system should  enable  us  to  educate  and direct 
mental  activity more intelligently.  In a  recent symposium con 
cerning the "Education of Biologists for the Modem World," the 
distinguished  investigator  Beach  ( 11)  lucidly  expressed  the 
thoughts of many scientists by saying:  " ... man's greatest prob 
lem today is not to understand and exploit his physical environ 
ment, but to understand and govern his conduct .... If he is  to 
survive  he must  proceed  to  explore  himself and  to control  his 
own activities .... Science can and must provide the understand 
ing necessary for prediction.  .  .. If science  provides  knowledge 
society will  display wisdom." 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com3 

Mental Liberation  and Domination 

In ~e near future we  can expect a  rapid expansion in applica 
tions  of atomic  power,  programed  e4ucation,  and  production 
_of machinery, along with higher standards of living and length 
-c:ning of human life. Even with this optimistic outlook, we may 
wonder where progress:_and _technplogy __  are leading us. 

The  United  States  enjoys  an  econoinic  level,  educational 
system,  and a  technological  development  far .superior  to  those 
of countries like Spain, Poland, or Jndia:. yet it is  questionable 
whether  its  citizens  experi~nce greater  haPpiness,  family  love, 
. closer friendships, and less f~; anxiety:;  and psychological  pres 
_ sure  than the  people in less  advanced  countries.  Neither  East 
.IJor  West has  succeeded in resolving hUJI)all  conflicts,  and  the 
· c!atest technology is being used to !Wl tho~ds of people around 
;,the w.orld. If modem . civilization with its  many  comforts  does 
.. pot  provide  greater · individual· and  SQCial  happiness  than  less 
, ~dvanced societies do,  the valu_<t Of  this .~ of civilization may 
\\Tell be challenged . 
. .••.  WecS}lould realize t;bat in spite .()f.our -progress in other areas, 
~sychic life  and  emotional  reaCtioJ:lS  .are. -little  known.  The 
.s,olutions  to  present  social. conflicts  proposed  by  sociologists, 
~.feligiou5 organizations, experimental instttutes:. and the United 
:_1\[~tions have  had only limited success.  :This  is  partly  because 
:the . usual  names  of reference  for  th~ :S()lutions  have  been 
:politics, economics, history, metaphysics, sociology, and psychol 
ogy, -while the basic cerebral mechanis~ related to man's ideas, 
17 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com~f~XSICAI. CONTROL  OF  THE  MINI> 

· 

emotions, aggt.~ions, desir-es, arid pleasures have . been ignored. 
Individ*a.l :r¢actio~ ~e (ietetmined by environmental factors 
acting  thr:ough ·sensOry_ irip~ts upon  neurophysiological  proc 
esses  and  ar_e 'marlifested  through  appropriate .·  motor  outputs 
as  behavior."  A11  oftlleseJnterveQ.irig  elements .must be  taken 
into considerationt«;>  ~derstarid the  responses  of individuals. 
Toex<lmitiethte pl"(J])lem~nly from outside of the organism, as 
is  ustially _do,n«:. -is  a$  'im.ufficient .as  if we  were  to  ignore  the 
environmef.lt  and· try. to  explain  behavior  solely  in  terms  of 
neuronal .:activity,. 
-~. 
At present, not only.is there far greater emphasis on material 
environment than on . the understanding of the mind, but what 
is even tnore' dangerous, this lack of balance. is self-perpetuating 
through··.edu_cation!  :ec~nomic incentives,  and ·general  orienta 
tion of dvilized: lif¢ · (tJg);  -~'The .  danger  that the entire culture 
may  become teChnological is  obvious"  (15),  and the divorce  of 
mind  from  life ·which . is  taking  place  catastrophically  every 
whete _in .the. modem world  (10) has evoked  strong intellectual 
reactioiis · and ·is ·one · of· the  central  themes  of  existential  phi 
losophy. Pre5ent civilization is geared to produce more and better 
machines and ·to increaSe physical power rather than to facilitate 
individual happiness,  Most of our time  is  spent  in  performing 
technicai skills; bejng transported by motorized vehicles,  being 
entertained : electronically,  and  in  other  occupations  which 
reflect  our increasingly mechanized  environment. 

The purpose  of education  is  to further  man's  knowledge  of 
himself and his surroundings through instruction in the arts an:d 
sciences.  During  the .last  few  decades,  technical  fields  of study 
have  multiplied  rapidly,  overshadowing  the  humanities  which 
until this·century formed the basis of education. Although such 
informatien  is  increasingly  available,  scant  effort  is  devoted 
specifically to providing an adequate foundation  for self-knowl 
edge or for the intelligent construction of individual personality. 
A  curriculum may  teach a  student something  about evolution 
and  general  physiology  and  may  introduce  him  to  various 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comMENTAL  LIBERA"I;ION  AND  DOMINATION 

19 

aspects  of his cultural inheritance,  but it usually explains  very 
Jittle about  the  most  important organ;  the  brain,  which  alone 
is  responsible for man's emergence as  a  unique anthropoid and 
on  which  every  person  must  rely  for  immediate  survival  and 
future  development.  Study . in  the  realms  of ·. philosophy  and 
introspection  is  generally  considered  a  nonessential  diversion 
not  directly  related  to  the  preparation  of  future  members  of 
the industrial society, and the infereJ1ce  that"man can st~cceed 
better  in  this  world  if  he  doesn't  invest  much  time  learning 
about  his  relation  to  it"  furth.er  promqtes  the  divergence  be 
>tween the technical world and the world-of ideas. This pedagogic 
deficiency was understandable in the past, when psychophysiolog 
Ical  knowledge  was  limited,  but tqday :S9ence  is  providing  the 
means to coordinate.the diverse fields of philQsophy and biology 
to form a new basis of inquiry into the natq.re of man. This is no 
}Qnger  a  purely  speculative  endeavQr  hut an  exploration  in  a 
new  direction  already  blazed  with-scientific  l~dmarks. When 
present knowledge about the physical st~hstratum of the human 
mind isdisseminated in centerS of!~ng, nian will he better 
equipped  to utilize his mental  powers  and  torelate effectively 
to  his environment, and,-the ll.eec:l$1 :~~n~e in orientation may 
be achieved. 

. 

. 

This  is  our  alternative:  to ·accept, _ enjoy,  and  promote _ the 
increasing  material  progress . without  investing .much  hope  or 
effort in.an attempt to uilde~d <RIT_-pQwercenter,  the brain, . 
·•or to modify the present direc(ion ofcivili«~tiou _by shifting part 
. of our available intellectual a~d ecQl\()~~resot~rces toward an 
investigation  of the  mechanisms  of m~tal activity.  This  re 
direction of  goals  could  proouce  an ev9~11tion of  the  mental 
. quest $imilar in significance to. tlu~ proc~ of eeol<>gicallibera 
tion and domination which have al~y- ~p-ed. 
..  The thesis  of this book is that we  now possess  the  necessary 
•. 
~echnology  for  the  experimental  investlgation ·of  mental  ac 
tivities, and that we have read).ed a critl~ turning point in the 
evolution of man .at which  the mind can  he used  to influence 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com20 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF THE  MIND 

its  own  structure,  functions,  and  purpose,  thereby  ensuring 
both the preservation and advance of civilization. The following 
pages  contain a  discussion  of what  the  mind  is,  the  technical 
problems  involved  in its  possible  control  by  physical  means, 
and  the  outlook  for  development  of a  future  psychocivilized 
society. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPART  II 

THE BRAIN AND  MIND 
AS  FUNCTIONAL  ENTITIES 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com4 

What  Is  the  Mind? 

Throughout  the  centuries,  the  most .powerful ·i.ntellects .ha:ve 
attempted  to comprehend  the mysteries of tlleir. own functiQn 
ing.  Long ago Socrates, leading -his disciples  through -~ colon 
nades of Athens, propounded eternal questions which ~ve been · 
repeated  throughout  history . in  endless:.·. ~iety: \Vba~.  is •.life? 
What is soul? What is mind? The essence  of -man evol~e.s fr9J:n 
the existence of mental functions which permit him to tbi.Pk ~d 
remember, to love and hate, . to believe in .myths and ·~ ll.<ieJJ.ce, 
to  create  and destroy civilizations.  It is  remarkable -t:ha:.t  a.£«,r 
hundreds  of  years  of  philosriphical  inquiry,  and  despite  tile 
impressive intellectual advances ofour pr~tera. the concept 
of  the  mind remains  elusive;  controversial,  and  impossible  to 
confine within linguistic liJnits; It is alsosurprising~t: i,n sp~ . 
of the importance of tbe :qiiDd  for .. · individual smyi~JlJ}fl f9l" 
the preservation of civilization, our gene:r.ition is mai~ly --hit~­
ested in atoms, cells, and stars, and dir~ so Iitde eff9i;t t()~d 
the exploration of the inn~r space of the psyche. 

Before  entering  into a . <liscussion · of  Jll,e~ activiti~. it is 
important to clarify the m~g of certain,wor<ls.  lnvestigat:Qrs 
_often ch~e to avoid .a defutition of tenil$,."utiLizing operatW_n<l! 
descriptions instead. This_ pr~edure may. be reasoiJClble _~ so.me 
experimental work, but at other times .it is  inadeq~~ ~~ 
a particular ~tiou-for ,exaiJ:lple,  emotion--may be·.ex.plor~ 
by  different methods · which  lead  to .a  diversity  of  o~rationa1 
definitions  of  the  same  term;  The  same  hol<ls  true  for  In,eta-

23 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

24 
physical  concepts,  and  the  scientist  cannot  completely  ignore 
them. 

In  spite  of  the  difficulty  involved,  it  is  convenient  to  dis 
tinguish among the brain, mind, psyche, spirit, and soul, if only 
to avoid  ambiguities.  Unless  each  term  is  defined,  the  reader's 
conception  may  differ  from  the  writer's.  Classifications  and 
definitions are only human agreements which try to capture the 
essence  of a  person,  place,  or event by describing several  of its 
elements.  They  are  like  sketches,  which  may  omit  or  distort 
details.  Naturally, if there is no agreement on the subject under 
discussion,  the meaning of related  words  and  sketches  will  be 
useless.  Definitions  should  be  considered  as  working  tools  to 
guide us on confusing ideological battlefields.  For example,  the 
conventional  distinction  between static  and  dynamic  processes 
used  in  this  book  may  be  understood  as  an  artifact  reflecting 
both  our  mental  inability  to  capture  the  continuous  flow  of 
multiple events and our need to concentrate our attention on a 
selected moment. This procedure should not introduce excessive 
intellectual  distortion  provided  we  realize  its  existence  and 
limitations.  Theories,  experimental  tools,  and  descriptive  lan 
guage are all very different, depending on whether we are dealing 
with  chemistry,  action  potentials,  social  relations,  or  ghosts. 
When  the  entity  under  consideration  is  very  complex,  as  the 
mind is, it is necessary to employ different methods to analyze the 
various  properties,  and  it  may  be  difficult  to  integrate  results 
obtained  in  a  variety  of  ways  which  reveal  diverse  aspects  of 
truth. 

Few  definitions  are satisfactory;  the  multiplicity  and variety 
of those describing the mind are evidence of the complexity of 
this subject as well as the lack of agreement among acknowledged 
experts. Dictionaries list words as  they are popularly conceived, 
but current usage sometimes lacks scientific accuracy. Specialists 
employ  terminology  which  often  has  a  doctrinal  bias.  Conser 
vative authors agree that the mind is  indefinable at present and 
offer "raw material,"  "essays,"  "views,"  and "thoughts" leading 
toward  a  possible  definition.  This  confusion  has  a  venerable 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comWHAT  IS  THE  MIND? 

history.  The concept of mind in  the Western world  was  intro 
duced  into  philosophy  by Anaxagoras  in  the  fifth  century  B.C. 
He  called  it  nous,  a  substance  which  was  infinite,  self-ruled, 
mixed  with  nothing,  forming  part  of  all  living  things,  being 
the source of motion, and having similar properties  in animals 
and humans.  The nous was  considered an  impersonal  intellect 
..regulating  the  movements  of  the  cosmos.  Aristotle  and  Plato 
noted that Anaxagoras himself found little use for  this  concept 
which was later elaborated by other philosophers. In De anima, 
Aristotle considered the mind different from and superior to the 
soul, saying, "We have no evidence as yet about the mind or the 
power _to  think;  it seems  to be  a  widely different  kind of soul, 
differentiating what is eternal from what is perishable;  it alone 
is  capable  of  existence  in  isolation  from  all  other  psychical 
powers."  Aristotle  proposed  that  the  fetus  was  endowed  first 
with a  vegetative soul which was exchanged later for a sensitive 
soul  and  finally  replaced  before  birth,  by  God's  donation,  by 
a  rational  soul,  which  implied  to  Aristotle  that  he  must  once 
have  possessed  the  other  elemental  functions,  namely, 
the 
sensitive  and  the  vegetative,  which  were  both  shared  by 
animals. 

Aristotelian  thought  has  permeated  most  Occidental  philo 
sophical  systems  until  modern  times,  and  the  classification  of 
man's functions as vegetative, sensitive, and rational is still useful. 
In present popular usage, soul and mind are not clearly differen 
tiated and some  people,  more or less  consciously,  still feel  that 
the soul,  and perhaps the mind, may enter or leave  the body as 
independent entities. 

Several attempts to define the mind follow: 

1.  ".  •  •  an organized  group  of  events  in  neural  tissue  occurring 
immediately  in response  to  antecedent  intrapsychic  or extrapsychic 
events which it perceives, classifies,  transforms, and coordinates prior 
to initiating action whose consequences are foreseeable  to the extent 
of available information. The aspect of a biological organism that is 
not  organic  in  nature  .  .  .  (in  man  it  is  experienced  as  emotions, 
imagination,  or will)"  (283). 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

2.  The  mind has  been  identified  with  "the  faculty  of  memory," 
"thought,"  "purpose  or  intention,"  "the  seat  of  consciousness, 
thoughts,  volitions and feelings,'~ "desire or wish,"  "the incorporeal 
subject of the psychical faculties,"  "the soul as distinct from  the will 
and emotions"  (169). 

3·  "The organized  totality of psychical  structures  and processes, 

conscious,  unconscious,  and endopsychic"  (67). 

4·  "The sum total of those activities of an organism, by means of 
which it responds as an integrated, dynamic system to external forces 
(usually) in some relation to its own past and future.  The organized 
totality of conscious experience"  (235). 

5·  " ... restricted to 'conscious mind'  in all its general  operation 
field  of perceiving,  feeling, -thinking,  remembering,  and willing.  As 
such,  mental  phenomena  are  facts  of experience  ... "  (71). 

6.  "A  highly  developed  neurological  apparatus  with  which  an 
animal  interprets  his  inner  and  outer  environmental  stimuli.  At 
taining consciousness,  mind  initiates  and carries  through  action  or 
the delayed type of action called  thought"  (181). 

7·  "The group of events connected with the given event by mem 
ory-chains, backwards and forwards." "A mind and a  piece of matter 
are,  each of them, a group of events."  "Some events may  be neither 
mental nor material,  and other events  may  be both"  (193). 

8.  "Mind is  thus synonymous with consciousness."  "Consciousness 
can  thus  be  defined  as  an  orderly  manifold  of  sensations  and  per 
cepts.  In  an  abbreviated  enumeration,  we  may  distinguish  optic, 
tactile  (in  the  wider  sense),  acoustic,  olfactory,  and  gustatory  per 
cepts.  In  addition  there  are  internal  memory  images,  abstractions 
and thoughts,  emotions  and vague  feelings"  (134). 

Despite variations in wording and in meaning, most concepts 
of  the  mind  share  several  qualities  which  may  be  summarized 
and interpreted as follows: 

1.  The  definitions  express  what  the  mind  does,  but  not  what  it 

is,  or when or how it is  formed. 

2.  Mental functions are described as active processes,  not as passive 

objects. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comWHAT  IS  THE  MIND? 

3·  The principal functions of the mind are interpretation, storage, 
and  retrieval  of  both  inner and  outer stimuli  through  processes  of 
thinking,  remembering,  feeling,  willing,  and  other  phenomena 
which are not well identified. 

In order to be more precise in our consideration of these phe 
nomena, we may ask ( 1) if there is any mental function unrelated 
to inner or outer stimuli,  ( 2)  if there  is  any way  the  mind can 
manifest itself other than in behavior, and (3)  if the mind could 
exist without a  functioning brain. If these  three questions  have 
negative answers,  then we may conclude that the mind is  neces 
sarily  linked  to  stimuli,  to  behavior,  and  to  the  brain.  In  my 
opinion,  without stimuli (or without the  brain),  the  mind can 
not  exist;  without  behavior,  the  mind  cannot  be  recognized. 
Because of its  essential  dependence on  sensory  inputs,  both  at 
birth  and  throughout  adult · life,  the  mind  may  be  defined  as 
the intracerebral elaboration of extracerebral  information. The 
problem  is  then  focused  on  the  origins,  reception,  dynamics, 
storage,  retrieval,  and  consequences  of  this  information.  The 
basis of the mind is cultural, not individual. 

The term  "psyche"  constitutes the etymological  root  for  the 
disciplines  of  psychology,  psychiatry,  and  psychosomatic  med 
icine.  The words  "mind"  and  "psyche"  are  usually  considered 
interchangeable,  and will be  used  here  as  such.  But before  we 
proceed-with an analysis  of the concept of the  mind or psyche, 
we  should  clarify  the  metaphysical  meanings  that  are  often 
ascribed  to these terms. 

· 

Mind and Soul 

The  personal  beliefs  of  scientists  concerning  the  ultimate 
destiny of  man  are  not  usually  related  to  their  investigations. 
The study of carbohydrate metabolism, microwaves, or celestial 
bodies may not inHuence  personal conceptions  of  immortality, 
free will, or God.  Scientists are generally reluctant to  combine 
experimental  work  with  philosophy  and  usually  reject  con 
sideration  of possible  theological  implications  of  their  studies 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

even  more  vigorously.  The domains  of philosophy and science 
were  clearly  delimited  by  Bertrand  Russell  (192)  who  wrote: 
"Philosophy, as  I shall understand the word,  is something inter 
mediate between theology and science.  Like theology, it consists 
of speculations on matters as  to which definite  knowledge  has, 
so  far,  been  unascertainable;  but  like  science,  it  appeals  to 
human reason rather than to authority, whether that of tradition 
or that of revelation. All definite knowledge belongs to science; 
all  dogma  as  to  what  surpasses  definite  knowledge,  belongs  to 
theology." 

The  possibility  of  a  relationship  between  man  and  super 
natural  life  is  traditionally implied in  the  ordinary  use  of  the 
words  "soul,"  "anima,"  and  "spirit."  The  Oxford  Dictionary 
defines "soul" as "the principle of life;  the principle of thought; 
the seat of emotions, feelings and sentiments"; and "the spiritual 
part of man considered in its  moral aspect  in relation  to  God" 
(169). 

The first  three descriptions,  especially  the  third,  could easily 
be  attributed to  the mind-which shows  how  confusing  termi 
nology is.  In my opinion, it is preferable to consider the mind as 
a  functional  entity devoid of metaphysical  or religious implica 
tions per se  and related only to the existence of a  brain and to 
the  reception of sensory  inputs.  The words  "soul"  or  "anima" 
will be used when reference is  made to man's relationship with 
supernatural forces,  life after death, or the existence of God. 

The  term  "spirit"  is  sometimes  equated  with  "soul,"  and  it 
is  disconcerting  to  realize  that  it  is  commonly  applied  to  a 
wide  range  of disparate  objects  from  an  alcoholic  beverage  to 
a disembodied soul, as well  as  including the  third person of the 
Christian  Trinity.  Another complication  is  that  "Holy  Ghost" 
is  Saint Spirit  in French and Espiritu Santo  in Spanish,  render 
ing  the  words  "ghost"  and  "spirit"  synonymous.  Because  the 
meanings of "spirit" are so varied, it seems wiser to use this term 
infrequently. 

The  soul  is  a  metaphysical  concept;  it  is  incorporeal,  Im 
mortal,  and  has  possibilities  for  salvation  or  damnation.  Ac-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comWHAT  IS  THE  MIND? 

29 
ceptance  or  rejection  of  the  existence  of  the  soul  depends  on 
religious conviction, on faith, and on theological considerations 
which cannot be proved or disproved  by  present  experimental 
methods. Science has conquered the mind as a subject of experi 
mental investigation, but the soul remains outside the realm of 
scientific  inquiry.  The scientist  may  regard  the soul  as  a  myth 
created  by  psychological  needs;  he  may  consider  the  soul  as  a 
religious interpretation of the mind, carrying responsibility for 
a future life;  or he may accept its existence as  a  religious truth. 
In any  case,  the  soul  exists  in  the  human  mind  as  a  concept 
which  should  not  be  ignored.  While  the  intellectual  polemic 
over its existence and the definition of its qualities and manifes 
tations  belong  to  theologians  and  philosophers,  the  emotional 
and rational elements leading to acceptance or rejection of the 
concept of the soul are manifestations of the mind. As such they 
are dependent on cerebral physiology and thus  become  part of 
the scientist's domain subject to experimental research. Here we 
find  a  good  example  of  philosophical  and  religious  questions 
which may face  neurophysiologists in the future. 

Thoughts  and  beliefs  are  necessarily  dependent  on  neuro 
physiological activity of the brain. We cannot believe in eternal 
life or in any of the religious concepts if we do not have a  func 
tioning brain,  if all  cerebral  excitability  has  been  blocked  by 
anesthesia,  or  if  the  thinking  process  has  been  inhibited  by 
electrical  stimulation  of  the  septal  area  of  the  brain.  Under 
these  conditions,  beliefs  and  desires  disappear,  but  this  fact 
cannot  be  interpreted  operationally  by  saying  that  religious 
faith is a function of the septum or of any other part of the brain. 
A  natural question would be whether or not the soul could be 
modified  by  experimentation,  because  thoughts,  remorse,  re 
sponsibility,  vices,  and  virtues  are  revealed  precisely  through 
behavior, and behavior is determined by cerebral activity.  Per 
haps it is too soon to pursue these questions, but it is  necessary 
for  scientists  to clarify  the  terms  in  which  such  problems  are 
stated.  Theologians,  also,  certainly  need. to redefine  what  they 
have settled upon as  the characteristics or manifestations of the 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

soul because, for example, the properties of the anima as stated 
by Catholic doctrine, namely memory, understanding, and will, 
are  now known to be activities subject to experimental investi 
gation and related to the chemistry of ribonucleic acids, eleetrical 
activity  of  the  hippocampus,  and  anatomical  integrity  of  the 
frontal  lobes. 

The dilemma of the soul is this:  Hwe accept mental activities 
as  manifestations  of  the  soul,  then  the  modifications  of  these 
functions by physicaltneans, suth as electrical stimulation of the 
brain, would signify the manipulation of the soul by electricity 
-which is illogical because' the soul is incorporeal by definition. 
If, on the othet hand, we deprive the soul of all mental functions 
which can be demonstrated to be dependent on brain physiology, 
then the soul is reduced to an abstraction, not only incorporeal, 
but also with a minor symbolic relation to reality. 

The altemative would be to consider the mind and the soul 
as different aspects of the same reaiity, in much the same way as 
corpuscular and undulatory theories of light are complementary 
interpretations  of  reality  with  relatively  independent  sets  of 
properties.  This is a  solution based neither on logic  nor on ex 
perimental theory; it is a speculation which may serve as a work 
ing hypothesis  to be proved or disproved. 

In this book the soul, or anima, will be considered a  theolog 
ical concept beyond the limits of our discussions, while the mind 
will  be understood as  an entity,  devoid  of  theological  implica 
tions,  which  can  be  investigated  experimentally  regardless  of 
positive or negative religious bias. 

The  Brain  Defined 

In  contrast  with  the  difficulties  and  controversial  issues 
encountered  in  the  attempt  to  characterize  soul  and  mind, 
definition of the brain is relatively easy; The brain, or cerebrum, 
is  a  material  entity located  inside  the  skull  which  may  be  in 
spected,  touched,  weighed,  and  measured.  It  is  composed  of 
chemicals,  enzymes,  and  humors  which  may  be  analyzed.  Its 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comWHAT  IS  THE  MIND? 

structure  is  characterized  by  neurons,  pathways,  and  synapses 
which may be examined  directly when  they  are  properly  mag 
nified. 

To  function,  the  brain  must  be  alive,  meaning  that  the 
neurons are consuming oxygen,  exchanging chemicals  through 
their limiting surfaces, and maintaining states of electrical polar 
ization interrupted by brief periods of depolarization;  but even 
when it is dead-meaning that chemical and electrical phenom 
ena are ab5ent-the brain can still  be recognized,  preserved  in 
formaline,  and  dissected  for  examination  of  its  anatomical 
structures.  The  brain . is  essentially  a  chemical  and  physical 
entity  with  many  complex  functions  related  to  genetic  and 
environmental influences. It functions as a part of the body, but 
it can survive independently for  a  limited  period when  appro-
priate circulation is  provided. 

-

Some  of  the  brain's  functions  are  ree~ized as  mental 
activities,  but  other  of  its  chemical,  therm3l,  and  electrical 
phenomena subserve physiological-needs unrelated to the mind. 
One quality of the brain is ~that it may -be considered  in static 
and  material  terms,  at  least  with - respect- to  morphological, 
cytological, and chemical characteristics·whiclure self-contained. 
In  contrast,  the  mind  is  a  functional  entity  which  cannot  be 
preServed in formaline or analyzed  u:nder. the microscope.  It is 
not  autonomous  but depends on  the  cerebral  reception  of  a 
temporal sequence of phenomena and i:n:on~uous- exchange of 
infoTIQation with the envirolllllent m_ ordeito funCtion properly, 
as  will be discussed  later. The term  "mind~~js-an abbreviation 
for  the ill-defined group of mental aCtivities,  The existence  of 
mind depends on the existence of a -functioning brain, and with 
out brain there is no mind. The ~ontrary~ ho\\rever,  is  not true, 
and in the absence  of mental  maili~est:ation5~ fm ·example  dur 
ing deep anesthesia,  several  brain functions;  sudt. as  maintain 
ance  of  respiration,  may  still  continue at physiological  levels. 
The common usage of the terms ''brain" and ''mind" as equiva 
lent may. be acceptable provided we are aware of the points  of 
contact and divergence of their r-espective meanings. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

The Mind as a Functional Entity 

The dynamic  concept  of  the  mind  as  a  group  of  functions 
rather than as an object introduces a linguistic and grammatical 
dilemma  which  has  been  recognized  by  several  authors  (195). 
In languages with European roots,  nouns are generally used  to 
designate  things  which  have  a  passive  character  (book,  chair, 
table).  Actions,  movements,  and dynamic  processes  are  usually 
expressed by verbs (reading, running, eating). The fact that mind 
is  considered as a  noun and that its functions  are expressed  by 
verbs  (thinking, willing, feeling),  indicates a  conceptual dichot 
omy which distorts general understanding. The mind should not 
be  identified  with  other  nouns  like  brain  or  heart:  functions 
depend on, but should not be classified as, organs. 

The mind or psyche, however, has been regarded as  an organ 
comparable  to  other  organs  or  systems  such  as  the  liver  or 
kidney.  A  psychiatric  dictionary  (uo)  states  that  "there  is  the 
organ called  the  psyche,  which,  like  other organs,  possesses  its 
own  form  and  function,  its  embryology,  growth,  and  micro 
scopic anatomy, physiology, and pathology . ... The mind,  like 
all  other organs  of  the  body,  has  its  own  local  functions,  and 
also  those functions that are intimately associated with adjacent 
and distant organs.  It is like the cardiovascular system in that it 
reaches  all  parts  of  the  body."  While  most  laymen  as  well  as 
psychologists  and  philosophers  would  reject  the  concept  that 
the mind is an organ, it is convenient to analyze the controversy 
briefly in order to clarify the ideas involved. 

Organs such as  the heart, the stomach, or the brain are  tangi 
ble  objects  with  a  shape,  structure,  and  chemical  composition 
which can be identified even after the death of the host organism, 
when all normal functions have ceased.  Mental functions do not 
form  part of brain anatomy;  they are related to cerebral  physi 
ology.  The mind cannot be inspected visually;  only its dynamic 
expression  as  behavioral  performance  is  observable. 

The  functions  of  organs  such  as  the  heart  are  genetically 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comWHAT  IS  THE  MIND? 

33 
determined. They are ready to start at the moment of birth, do 
not  depend  on  environmental  stimuli,  and  do  not  require 
learning.  Mental activities have exacdy contrary characteristics, 
and the development of their functional substratum within the 
brain depends  essentially  on  extragenetic  factors.  This  will  be 
discussed  later. 

In biology,  the physiology of structures cannot be completely 
ascertained from examination of the anatomy. For example,  the 
circulation of the blood should be differentiated  from  the  sup 
porting organs such as  the heart, arteries, and other parts of the 
cardiovascular system  because blood pressure,  flow,  and circula 
tion  are  dynamic  concepts  related  to  spatial  and  temporal 
changes in the blood as it moves  through the vessels.  The blood 
itself  can  be  analyzed  in  order  to  discover  its  chemical  and 
morphological  properties,  and  this  information  will  facilitate 
the nnderstanding of its possible functions.  It will not, however, 
explain  the  dynamics  of  circulation,  which  depends  on  the 
summation  of  systolic  volume,  heart  rate,  arterial  elasticity, 
vasomotility,  blood  volume,  blood  viscosity,  and  many  other 
factors, none of which are synonymous with circulation.  In like 
manner,  the  mind  should  not  be considered  identical  with  its 
supporting  organ,  the  brain.  Information  about  the  anatomy, 
physiology,  and  biochemistry  of  neurons  will  facilitate  the 
understanding of mental manifestations because  these activities 
depend  upon  cerebral  functions.  This  information,  however, 
will  not  fully  explain  mental  dynamics  because  the  mind  is 
related  not only  to  the  structure of  neurons  but  also  to  their 
spatial-temporal relations and to important extracerebral factors. 

Heterogeneous  Qualities  of the Mind 

On previous pages,  the mind has  been referred to as  a  single 
entity,  and  it is  very common  in layman's  language  as  well  as 
in philosophical and scientific discussions  to find that the mind 
is considered as a nnit. In reality, however, mental activities such 
as  talking,  understanding,  or  problem  solving  not  only  have 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

34 
different  sensory  inputs  and  behavioral  manifestations  but 
depend on different  cerebral structures  and  mechanisms.  Even 
within a  particular mental function  there may be considerable 
anatomical  and  physiological  specificity,  as  demonstrated  by 
disturbances in speech recognition which may affect the written 
or the spoken word exclusively. 

One of the main difficulties in attempts to define the mind is 
that  we  try  to  supply  a  common  denominator  for  all  mental 
manifestations, insisting upon similarities among entities which 
are basically unlike. Cats, monkeys, and men are homogeneous as 
mammals but heterogeneous as species, and many of the morpho 
logical  and  functional  characteristics  present  in  one  group 
cannot be attributed to  the others.  Man, for example, does  not 
enjoy catching and eating mice,  nor are  monkeys  able  to  play 
chess.  Unfortunately, some discussions about the mind concern 
elements  as  dissimilar  as  cats,  monkeys,  and  men.  It  is  only 
natural that agreement will be difficult if authors think that they 
are referring to the same subject-the mind-when one  is  con 
sidering free will, another consciousness,  and still another crea 
tive  writing.  When  consulting  the  literature  we  should  not 
assume that different phenomena are equivalent merely because 
authors use the ·same words to identify them. We should remem 
ber  that  mental  functions  include  a  variety  of  heterogeneous 
phenomena. 

One additional problem involves  the dynamic quality of the 
mind. The heart can  be  taken out of an organism and stopped 
in  order to  study  its  valves,  the  thickness  of  its  walls,  or  the 
shape of its cells,  but we  cannot remove  the  brain to study  the 
mind  because  it  vanishes;  we  cannot  preserve  intelligence  in 
formalin.  The  dynamic  and  temporal  elements  of  mental 
activity  are  crucial  and  reflect  the  elusive  and  everchanging 
qualities of the  phenomenon. 

The mind is  so complex and heterogeneous that it is  difficult 
to  answer  the  classical  questions,  "What  is  the  mind?"  and 
"Where is  the mind?"  In my opinion, these questions are incor 
rectly  stated.  Present  knowledge  requires  us  to  approach  the 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comWHAT  IS  THE  MIND? 

35 
problems  in  a  new  way  and  to  rephrase  them  if  we  wish  to 
progress in understanding.  We should seek  neither general  nor 
total answers,  but information  about specific  problems  or frac 
tions of problems. Today we are in an intellectual and technical 
position to ask,  for example, which parts of the brain do-or do 
not-play a role in memory, problem solving, or visual recogni 
tion. Experiments may be designed and performed to investigate 
these subjects. 

In my  discussion  of  the  physical  exploration  of  the  mind,  I 
propose  to  examine  the  problem  not  in  general,  but  in  some 
detail, asking questions and presenting experimental data about 
modifications of pleasure, sensations, . behavioral responses,  and 
other  manifestations  of  mental  activities  obtained  by  direct 
manipulation of the brain. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com5 

Extracerebral  Elements  of the  Mind: 

When  and How  the  Mind Is  Formed 

In Plato's works,  Socrates is  presented as  a  kind of intellectual 
midwife who extracted knowledge already existent in the person 
he  questioned.  According  to  the  doctrine  of  recollection, 
learning is  only the remembering of knowledge  possessed  in  a 
former life.  In Phaedo,  the second argument for  the survival of 
the soul is that knowledge is recollection, and therefore the soul 
must have  existed  before  birth. 

Arilitotle rejected the theory of inborn ideas and proposed the 
metaphorical  tabula  rasa,  which  was  subsequently  accepted  in 
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries by empirical  physiol 
ogists,  including Locke and  Helvetius. The newborn mind was 
considered  a  blank  tablet  on  which  experience  would  write 
messages,  and  the  dissmilarities ·  between  individuals  were 
attributed solely  to differences in education. 

The Aristotelian  principle,  "Nihil  est  in  intellectu  quod  no 
prius suent in sensu"  (St.  Thomas, De  Veritatis,  II,  3), repeated 
among  others  by  Leonardo  da  Vinci  ("Ogni  nostra  cognizioni 
·  cipia dai  sentimenti"), expressed  the idea still  prevalent !p 
times that "nothing is  in the intellect which was not first 
."  Some  authors,  including  Epicurus  and  the  sen 
the  importance  of  sensory  inputs  to  its  limit, 

prese 
in  the  sen 
sualists,  stresse 
proposing that the-i,ntellect is only what is  in our senses.  · 

Between · the . extremes of considering the mind either sophis-

36 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comEXTRACEREBRAL  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  MIND 

37 
ticated or naive at birth, contemporary opinion holds that both 
genetic  and  experiential  components  are  essential,  although 
their  functions  and  relative  importance  remain  controversial. 
According to several child psychiatrists, heredity and experience 
are  equipotent  (156,  225).  Piaget  (178)  has  emphasized  that 
while  the human brain is  an al~ost entirely hereditary regula 
tory- organ,  it  has  practically  "no  hereditary  programming  of 
these  regulations,  quite unlike  the case  of so  many instincts  in 
birds  or  fishes . . . .  "  Intelligence  combines  two  cognitive 
systems:  experience  and  endogenous  regulations.  The  last 
system  is  a  source of intellectual operations;  by  prolonging the 
feedbacks  and correcting  the  mistakes,  it transforms  them  into 
instruments of precognition.  _ 

The genetic determination of mental functions has been sup 
ported  by  Rainer  (181),  who  believes  that  the  fertilized  ovum 
contains "the primordia of what we  later call  mind,"  and  that 
"the newborn infant is  already as  much of an individual  'men 
tally' as  he is  physiognomically."  According to the evolutionary 
theories  of William James  (119),  "the new  forms  of being that 
make  their appearance  are really  nothing more  than  results  of 
the redistribution of the original and unchanging materials ... 
the evolution of the brains,  if understood, would be simply  the 
account of how  the  atoms  came  to  be  so  caught and  jammed. 
In  this story no new natures  Uames's  emphasis],  no factors  not 
present at the beginning are introduced at any later stage." 

In  agreement  with  these  ideas,  Sherrington  (2o6)  writes: 
"Mind as  attaching  to  any  unicellular  life  would  seem  to  me 
unrecognizable to observation; but I would not feel  that permits 
me  to affirm  it  is  not  there.  Indeed,  I  would  think  that  since 
mind appears in the developing soma,  that amounts to showing 
that  it  is  potential  in  the  ovum  (and  sperm)  from  which  the 
soma sprang. The appearance of recognizable mind in the soma 
would  then  be  not  a  creation  de  novo  but a  development  of 
mind from  unrecognizable into recognizable." 

The  importance  of  the  prenatal  period as  a  determinant  of 
future behavior crystallized in the concept of "ontogenetic zero" 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

(88)  has been accepted by most child psychologists  (30).  At  the 
moment  of  fertilization,  the  life  of  a  unique  individual  is 
initiated (at birth, a child is already nine months old);  and some 
experts have suggested that its beginning should be traced back 
through  evolution  of  the  parental  reproductive  cells  or  even 
through  previous  generations. 

These theories have the merit of stressing the role of genetics 
in the formation of the mind, but they give  the false  impression 
that genetic factors  alone are able  to create a  inind,  or  that  in 
some  mysterious  way,  a  minute;  undeveloped  mind  already 
exists  in the cells.  At the core of this discussion  is  the  meaning 
of  "potentiality,"  which  is  a  convenient  concept  provided  that 
we  understand  its  limitations.  If we say  "a  block  of  marble  is 
potentially  a  piece  of sculpture,"  we  mean  that  marble  is  an 
element which can' be shaped into a  symbolic  pattern  by using 
chisels  and  hammers  with  appropriate  skills.  We  may  say  that 
all  shapes a:nd  artistic  ~eations potentially exist in  the marble, 
but the reality is  that in the absence of a  sculptor,  the  piece of 
stone lacks,  per se,  the essential  elements  to  become  a  work  of 
art. It would be incorrect to think that tools or skills are hidden 
within the  block of marble, or that  if we  waited  long enough, 
a  statue  would  emerge  spontaneously  from  the  block.  This 
type of incorrectreasoning has been called the  "error of poten 
tiality"  (137).  It has infiltrated the field  of embryology and has 
influenced analyses  of the origin and evolution of mental  func 
tions  by assuming,  at a  certain stage  of development,  the  exist 
ence  of  properties which  are  present  only  at  a  later  stage  and 
which depend on a  series of essential conditions neither present 
in nor determined by the stage  under consideration. 

If we say  that the  mind is  in  the sperm,  we can  also  say  that 
each  man  has  one million children,  that  a  newborn  baby  will 
be  the  inventor of spaceships,  or that a  worm  may  evolve  into 
a monkey.  These statements may be potentially valid,  but their 
fulfillment  is  Contingent  upon  a  constellation  of  factors  which 
are  not  present  in  the  original  material.  In  spite  of  his  genes 
and  his  potentials,  a  man  cannot create  a  single  child  without 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comEXTRACEREBRAL  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  MIND 

39 

the  collaboration  of  a  woman;  and  a  baby  will  not  invent 
rockets  unless  he  is  exposed  to  a  highly  sophisticated  level  of 
physics. We believe that worms have evolved into more complex 
forms  of life,  and  that potentially  they  may produce dinosaurs, 
supermen, or inhabitants of the moon,  but before we allow our 
imagination  to  wander  among  the  limitless  possibilities  of 
nature, it is preferable to identify the factors responsible for  the 
observed  reality  among  an  infinite  number  of  theoretical 
potentials. 

According to early theories of preformism, the germinal cell 
the  ovum-held  a  miniature  organism  with  microscopic  eyes, 
arms,  legs,  and other parts of the  body which eventually would 
grow. The ovaries of Eve had potentially the bodies-and minds 
--of all mankind. As soon as scientific embryology began, it was 
evident  that  the  germinal  cell  did  not  contain  a  compressed 
homunculus, but only a  plan which required the interaction of 
other elements in order to develop into a  human being. 

A  relatively  small  group  of organization  centers  (the  genes), 
with  the collaboration  of  molecules  supplied  from  the  outside 
(the  mother),  produce  another  series  of  organizers  (enzymes, 
hormones,  and  other  active  substances)  which  will  arrange 
patterns of molecules  for  the construction  of cells,  tissues,  and 
organs and will also produce a  new series of organizers to direct 
the  interaction  of  these  new  elements.  The  organizers  are  not 
completely  stereotyped  in  performance  but  are  influenced  by 
their medium. A  particular gene may have different phenotypic 
effects  in different  environments,  and  "genes  control  the  'reac 
tion  norm'  of the  organism  to  environmental  conditions"  (31 ). 
Blood vessels, muscles, and the various organs are differentiated; 
neurons appear,  their interconnections are established,  and  the 
brain evolves. Chromosomes have neither heart nor brain--only 
a set of architectonic plans which under suitable conditions will 
evolve  into  a  complete  organism.  These  plans  are  unfulfilled 
for  millions  of sexual  cells  and  for  countless  embryos  that  are 
casualties  in spontaneous  abortions.  The  possibilities  of  evolu 
tion are far from accomplished realities. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

If we accept these ideas, we may also state that the fecundated 
germinal cell  does  not talk,  understand,  or think, and  that  the 
resulting embryo has no mental functions before  the medullary 
plate rolls up to form  the neural tube. When can we detect the 
first signs of a  functioning mind? How are they correlated with 
the  anatomical  development  of  the  central  nervous  system? 
The study of  these  questions  may  be  simplified  if  we  first  ex 
amine  the  initial  signs  of  a  functioning  brain  as  revealed  by 
behavioral expression in lower animals.  Before the development 
of muscles,  motor neurons are already growing out to establish 
neural contacts  with  them.  The order of growth  is  a  "progres 
sive  individualism within a  totally integrated matrix; and not a 
progressive  integration  of  primarily  individuated  units"  (34). 
Motions,  therefore,  are  basically a  part of a total  pattern,  and 
their relative individualization  is  only a  secondary acquisition. 
Some  efferent motor pathways  appear before  any afferent  fiber 
enters  the  cerebrum.  Initially,  the  cerebral  association  system 
develops  toward  the  motor  system  and  the  peripheral  sensory 
fibers  grow  toward  the  receptor  field.  Significant  conclusions 
from these facts are that "the individual acts on its environment 
before  it  reacts  to  its  environment"  (35),  that  efferent  nerves 
must  be  stimulated  by  products of  the  organism's  metabolism, 
and  that  "behavior  in  response  to  such  stimulation  is  sponta 
neous  in  the  sense  that  it  is  the  expression  of  the  intrinsic 
dynamics of the organism as a whole" (37). Total behavior is not 
made up of reflexes; rather, "the mechanism of the total pattern 
is  an essential  component of  the  performance  of  the  part,  i.e., 
the reflex,"  and  behavior  therefore  "cannot  be  fully  expressed 
in terms of S-R  (Stimulus-Response)"  (37).  It is  significant  that 
in  man  vestibular  connections  develop  before  vestibular  sense 
organs, because this reveals that "the cerebral growth determines 
the  attitude  of  the  individual  to  its  environment  before  that 
individual  is  able  to receive  any  sensory  impression  of  its  en 
vironment.  Hence,  the  initiative  is  within  the  organism"  (36). 
Some  of  these  findings  have  been  confirmed  in  the  toadfish 
and  the  cunner  (228).  On  the  first  day  that  the  cunner  larva 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comEXTRACEREBRAL  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  MIND 

41 

swim  around  freely,  they  do  not  respond  to  external  stimuli. 
Thus under natural conditions, this species moves about without 
~n effective  exteroceptive  mechanism,  evidently  propelled by a 
"mechanism  of  motility  activated  from within."  The  afferent 
sensory  system  grows  gradually  until  it  finally  "captures"  the 
primitive  motor  system.  The  conclusion  is  that  behavior  has 
-two  components:  "endogenous  activity,  the  fundamental  mo-
tility conditioned by the inner physiological adjustments of the 
organism; and exogenous activity, the oriented activity by which 
endogenous  activity  is  so  modified  as  to  render  response  to 
external  stimuli possible"  (70). 

This information emphasizes the importance of genetic deter 
mination  and  indicates  that  some  mechanisms  for  behavorial 
performance  are  organized  in  the  absence  of  environmental 
inputs. It is generally accepted that development of the nervous 
system  is  basic  for  the  onset  and  elaboration  of  mammalian 
behavior,  but it  is  not clear whether  any factor  can  be singled 
out as decisive. Without synaptic conduction, impulses obviously 
cannot be transmitted:  thus the functional  maturity of synapsis 
must  be  essential  (104,  144,  205,  241).  Objections  have  been 
raised about the acceptance of synaptic permeability as  the main 
reason  for  onset  of  behavior  (140),  and  other  factors  may  be 
equally important. Activity of peripheral nerve fibers  is  consid 
ered essential for the differentiation and specificity of behavioral 
performance  (72,  78),  and  the  anatomical  development  of 
neurofibrillae  may  be  specifically  related  to  the  onset  of 
behavior  (136).  These and other studies  have  provided  impor 
tant  information,  but  its  interpretation  has  often  been  biased 
by methodological  distortions. 

It is a common error in behavioral embryology, and in science 
generally,  to  try  to  simplify  the  observed  phenomena  and  to 
reduce causality to a single factor,  excluding all  other variables. 
This is  the fallacy  of the single cause  ( 121 ), or failure  to under 
stand  that  a  biological  phenomena  is  always  the  product  of  a 
complex situation, not of a single determinant. With this pitfall 
in  mind,  we  must  face  the  task  of  identifying  the  several 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF THE  MIND 

42 
elements  essential  for  the  development  of  any  given  phenom 
enon,  and  both  conduction  and  synaptic  mechanisms  are  cer 
tainly basic  for  the onset of behavior. 

Myelin is a  substance with insulating properties covering the 
nerves, and its appearance in neuronal sheaths has often been as 
sociated With the oruet and differentiation of behavior by neuro 
anatomists.  A  correlation  perhaps  exists  for  some  specific 
behavior  patterns  in  the  cat  and  the  opossum  (138,  226),  but 
most  authors today  agree  that  the  myelogenetic  law  cannot  be 
generalized. In the newborn rat, myelination does not take place 
for  several  days  although  the  fetus  starts  moving  many  days 
before  birth, and some  discrete  reflexes  and inhibitory activity 
in higher centers can  be observed  in a  rat  fetus  nineteen  days 
after  conception  (5).  Myelination,  therefore,  cannot  be  inter 
preted as  necessary for  the conduction  of impulses  or for  func 
tional  insulation. 

Differences  in anatomical  and behavioral  evolution certainly 
exist  between  mammals  and  lower  life  forms.  In  the  guinea 
pig,  for  example,  limbs  are  well  formed  in  the  embryo  before 
appearance  of  the  first  behavioral  response,  while  in  the  sala 
mander  motor  behavior  is  initiated  before  morphological 
differentiation  of  the  limbs.  Evidently  embryologic  studies  of 
man  cannot  be  as  extensive  and  as  well  controlled  as  those  of 
amphibia,  but  valuable  information  on  this  subject  already 
exists (30).  Inside the uterus,  the human embryo has a  comfort 
able and sheltered life without facing responsibilities or making 
choices.  Cells  multiply  automatically  and  organs  take  shape 
while  the growing fetus  floats  weightless  in  the  silent  night  of 
amniotic  fluid.  Food  and  oxygen  are  provided  and  wastes  are 
removed continuously and effortlessly by the maternal placenta. 
As  the fetus grows, many organs perform something like a  dress 
rehearsal  before  their  functions  are  really  required.  This  is 
usually  referred  to  as  the  principle  of anticipatory  morpholog 
ical maturation. The heart starts to beat when there is no blood 
to pump;  the gastrointestinal  tract shows  peristaltic movements 
and begins  to  secrete  juices  in  the  absence  of food;  the  eyelids 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comEXTRACEREBRAL  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  MIND 

43 

open and close  in  the  eternal  darkness  of the  uterus;  the arms 
and legs move, giving  the mother the indescribable joy of feel 
ing a  new life inside herself;  even breathing movements appear 
several  weeks  before  birth when there · is  no air . to breathe  ( 1 ). 
Some  extensive  information about human fetal  behavior has 
been obtained by  indirect methods  in  pregnant --women,  while 
other  findings  were  obtained  directly  from  fetuses  surgically 
removed  for  medical  reasons  (112,  155,  176}~ The  first  move 
ment  observed  in  a  four-millimeter-long,  three"week-old  fetus 
is  the  heart  beat,  which  has  intrinsic determinants  because  it 
starts  before  the  organ  has  received ·. any nervous  connections. 
The neural elements needed for-a reflex act can be demonstrated 
in the spinal cord at the second month of embryonic life, and 
at that time, cutaneous stimulation may induce motor responses. 
A fourteen-week fetus shows most of the responses which can be 
observed in the neonate with  the exception of vO<;alization,  the 
tonic grasping reflex,  and respiratioo.  With fetal  growth,  spon 
taneous  motility  increases  inside  the  mother's  womb and  it is 
well  known  that  responses  from  the -fettis  may be  elicited  by 
tapping the mother's abdominal -wall. 

Sensory perception of the fetus has been investigated in detail 
by  several  scientists  (27, · 30,  240).  Cutaneous reception  is  well 
developed long before birth, and mechanical or thermal stimu 
lation  of  the  skin  elicits  appropriate  mot<>r  activity  related  to 
the stimulated area. The existence of pain -perception is doubtful. 
Proprioceptors  of  the  muscles  (the  spi_ndles)  develop  at  the 
fourth  month  of  fetal  life,  and  the  labyrinth is  evident  even 
earlier. Both organs are active during fetal life; they are capable 
of  postural  adjustments  and  may  be  partially  responsible  for 
fetal  motility in the uterus. 

· 

The  possibility  of  fetal  perception of ~twintestinal move 
ments,  hunger,  thirst,  suffocation,  an& other  types  of  organic 
experience has  been debated,  and it is  generally ;accepted  that 
internal stimuli may activate  skelet;aJ' mqsculature.  Distinction 
of  sweet  from  other  tastes  and  of  unpleasant  odors  such  as 
asafetida  has  been demonstrated  in preQla.ture  babies;  showing 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

44 
that  these  receptor  mechanisms  are  already  developed.  It  is 
doubtful,  however,  that with  the nose  and mouth  immersed in 
amniotic fluid, the fetus could have gustatory or olfactory experi 
ences  before  birth. 

The  auditory  apparatus  is  well  developed  at  birth,  but  the 
general consensus (18o) _is that the infant is deaf until the liquid 
of the fetal  middle ear is  drained  through  the  Eustachian  tube 
by breathing,  crying,  and  perhaps  yawning.  Loud  noises,  how 
ever,  might  be  perceived,  and  some  cases  of  presumed  fetal 
hearing have been reported (79). 

The optic apparatus is  sufficiently  developed in the newborn 
infant to permit perception of light and darkness,  but the optic 
nerve is not yet fully developed, and its evolution continues after 
birth and is probably influenced by sensory perception (180).  It 
is  highly  improbable  that  the  fetus  has  any  visual  experience 
during its uterine life. 

In summary,  it  is  unlikely  that  before  the  moment of  birth 
the  baby  has had any significant visual,  auditory,  olfactory,  or 
gustatory experience, and it is probable that it has received only 
a  very  limited  amount  of  tactile,  organic,  and  proprioceptive 
information. The newborn has an elaborated system of reflexes; 
and coughing, sneezing, sucking, swallowing, grasping, and other 
actions may be evoked by the appropriate sensory stimulation. In 
an  experimental study of seventeen  behavioral  responses,  their 
intercorrelations  proved . to  be  zero,  indicating  that  "there _ is 
no mental integration in the newborn child"  (82).  This integra 
tion usually takes place during the first postnatal month. 

Whether or not the fetus was capable of conscious experience 
was a classical  philosophical and psychological  problem debated 
at  length  with  a  flourish  of  words  and  speculations  but  with 
little  factual  support  (39,  86,  135,  147,  175).  It  is  difficult  to 
understand  the  basis  of  this  controversy  since  there  is  no  evi 
dence that the fetus  has visual,  auditory, olfactory,  or gustatory 
stimulation.  The  possibility  of  fetal  awareness  is  therefore  re 
duced to a limited input of organic sensations of proprioception 
and touch in the absence of the main sensory faculties.  Whether 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comEXTRACEREBRAL  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  MIND 

45 

or not these  phenomena can by themselves create consciousness 
is  mainly a  question of definition and arbitrary agreement,  but 
it may  be stated  that  they  cannot  produce  manifestations  com 
parable  to  those  of  consciousness  in  children  or adults,  which 
are  mainly  based  on  visual  and  auditory  perception  and  ex 
perience. The mystery is  perhaps insoluable due to the impossi 
bility of establishing verbal communication with the newborn. 
Anticipatory morphological  maturation  is  present in various 
mechanisms which remain quiescent  in the  fetus,  ready  to  per 
form  with  physiological  efficiency  as  soon  as  they  are  needed. 
Their necessary links  are  established  before  birth and are  trig 
gered  by  appropriate  stimulation.  These  functions,  which 
include  oral  suction,  respiration,  kidney  secretion,  and  gastro 
intestinal  activity,  are  able  to  act  several  weeks  bef-ore  an  ex 
pected delivery, in case  the baby is  born prematurely. 

No  comparable  provisions  exist  for  mental  functions.  The 
newborn brain is not capable of speech, symbolic understanding, 
or of directing skillful  motility.  It has  no  ideas,  words,  or con 
cepts,  no  tools  for  communication,  no  significant  sensory  ex 
perience,  no  culture.  The  newborn  baby  never  smiles.  He  is 
unable  to  comprehend  the  loving  phrases  of  his  mother  or  to 
be  aware  of  the  environment.  We  must  conclude  that  there 
are  no  detectable  signs  of  mental  activity  at  birth  and  that 
human beings are born without minds. This statement may seem 
startling,  but  it  should  not  be  rejected  by  saying,  "Well,  you 
don't see  mental functions  during the first  few  days,  but every 
thing  is  ready  for  action;  wait  a  few  weeks,  or  perhaps  a  few 
months;  it is  just a  slight lack of maturity,  but the baby's mind 
is  there."  Potentiality  should  not  be  confused  with  reality.  A 
project  is  not  an  accomplished  fact,  especially  when  essential 
elements  are  lacking  in  the  original  design.  Naturally  a  baby 
Jacks  experience,  but by recognizing this  fact,  we  are  accepting 
the  essentiality  of  extracerebral  elements  which  originate  in 
the  outside  world  and  are  independent  of  both  the  organism 
and  its  genetic  endowment.  As  Cantril  and  Livingston  (29) 
have said, organisms are in a constant "transaction," in a  "proc-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

ess  of becoming," constantly changing into something different 
from what they were before.  Early in life, an infant is attracted 
to sources of comfort and repelled by sources  of distress.  These 
experiences lead  to the "intelligent" recognition of objects  and 
persons associated  with  positive or negative reinforcement,  and 
they  will  determine  selective  patterns  of  behavioral  response. 
"It is at this point, we think,  that 'mind' is born"  (29). 

The concept  of  the  mindless  newborn  brain  is  a  useful  hy 
pothesis because it clarifies our search for the origin of the mind. 
If this  origin  depended  on  genetic  endowment,  then  mental 
functions  should appear  in  the  absence  of  other  external  ele 
ments  (as  respiratory  functions  do).  If genetic  determination 
alone  is  not sufficient,  then we  must investigate  the source and 
characteristics  of  the  exttacerebral  elements  responsible  for 
the appearance of the mind as  the baby matures. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com6 

The Mindless,  Newborn Brain 

Psychoanalytical  interpretations  of fetal  life  are  not  in  accord 
with the concept of a mindless, newborn brain which I  propose, 
and  some  authors  ( 183,  193)  present  a  different  viewpoint  in 
approximately  the  following  terms.  In  the  intimate  ~oister 
of the mother, a growing being lives  a  peaceful, sheltered exist 
ence.  In  this  uterine  paradise,  without  fears  or  anxieties,  the 
embryo must have a  mother libido, and it experiences pleasure 
and pain, as demonstrated by  impulsive movements and by the 
sucking  responses  which  are  expressions  of  pleasurable  sexual 
sensations  related  to  mental  states  of  the  fetus.  Thinking  and 
willing are perhaps present to only a limited extent, but feeling 
exists  in the  embryo  with  hypertrophic sensitivity. 

One day,  something terrible happens.  The carefree,  parasitic 
existence  is  terminated, and there  is  a  brutal separation  of  the 
child  from  the  libido  object-the  mother-causing  a  psychic 
trauma,  the  primal  or  original  anxiety  state.  Later  on,  the 
child will  try  to  return symbolically  to its  mother's  womb,  and 
subconsciously he may remember forever the states of embryonic 
life  and  the anxiety of birth.  The child's  neurosis is  a  natural 
result of his  traumatic  arrival.  He is  usually  able  to  overcome 
it, although occasionally it persists during adult life. Sadger ( 193) 
reported that when  he could not relate some patients'  neuroses 
to  their  embryonic  periods,  he  induced  them  to  recall  what 
happened  to  their  original  spermatozoa  and  ova,  or  even  to 
remember  possible  parental  attitudes  which  could  have  pro-

47 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

duced a  trauma in the delicate germinal cells before conception. 
Sadger  maintained  that  these  cells  have  a  psychic  life  of  their 
own with the capacity to leam and to remember. 

It is difficult to accept the introspective statement of a neurotic 
patient  who  claims  to  possess  a  spermatozoic  memory,  since 
experimental studies show that the reactions of newbom babies 
are  so  elemental that  they  can  hardly  be  considered  signs  of a 
functioning  mind.  It  is  doubtful,  if  not  indeed  illogical,  to 
attribute  a  higher  degree  of  mental  activity  to  a  fetus  at  an 
even earlier stage of embryonic development. 

The  possible  existence  of  psychic  functions  in  the  newbom 
has  been repeatedly debated.  Some  authorities  accept  the  pres 
ence  in  the  infant  of  three  primary  emotions,  fear,  rage,  and 
love,  and  believe  that  all  other  emotions  result  from  the  con 
ditioning  of  these  innate  pattems  by  environmental  stimuli 
(237).  The  theory  of  differential  emotional  pattems  in  the 
neonate suffered a  serious blow when  it was  demonstrated  that 
competent observers of infant behavior could not agree on their 
interpretations  of emotional  pattems recorded  by  moving  pic 
t~res unless they knew the type of stimuli applied (204). The term 
"emotion"  should  not  be  ascribed  to  infant  behavior  because 
it lacks  differentiated responses,  and  the  existence  of a  "mind" 
in the neonate is really a matter of definition (n6, 222). 

The mind is  characterized by many heterogeneous functions, 
some of which exist at birth, if only in elemental form. Symbolic 
processes  as  determined  by  correlation  procedures  (82)  do  not 
exist  in  the  neonate,  but  temporary  leaming  of  simple  con 
ditioned responses has been demonstrated (213). Four conditions 
have been proposed as prerequisite to acceptance of the existence 
of  intelligent  behavior in any  organism:  ( 1)  a  functional  cere 
bral  cortex;  (2)  functional  distance  receptors;  (3)  an  upright 
posture;  and  (4)  the  achievement  of  substitutive  or  symbolic 
behavior.  According  to  these  criteria,  the  neonate  does  not 
qualify  for  intelligent  behavior,  and  its  activities  should  not 
be considered signs of mental life ( 117 ). 

Careful  studies  of  infants  demonstrate  that  their  eyes  will 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comTHE  MINDLESS,  NEWBORN  BRAIN 

49 
follow  small  moving  spots  of  light  as  early  as  two  weeks  after 
birth  (32).  Auditory  sensitivity  is  controversial,  and  pitch  dis 
crimination and differential responses related to  the patterning 
of  sound  seem  to  be  absent  (219).  Auditory  conditioning  has 
been  unsuccessful  until  the  second  month  of  life  (125).  The 
existence of olfactory perception and even gustatory discrimina 
tion  is  rather doubtful,  but sour and bitter solutions  influence 
sucking  and  may  evoke  facial  responses.  The  newborn  baby's 
ability  to  orient  toward  the  nipple  of  the  mother's  breast  is 
the most important response  in his  repertoire (172). 

Human  beings  are  born with  such  cerebral  immaturity  that 
their  very  survival  depends  completely  on  exterior  help,  and 
their behavior is  similar  to  that of a  purely spinal  being,  or at 
most,  of  a  brain  stem  or  midbrain  preparation  (44,  45,  139, 
173).  Most  neurologists  agree  that the  neonate  is  a  noncortical 
being.  After birth,  there  is  a  transitional  period during  which 
the  cerebral  cortex  starts  to  function,  and  then  its  activities 
progressively  increase  until  a  reciprocal  functional  correlation 
is  established with the rest of the brain. 

It had been generally assumed  that mammals were born with 
most  of  their  cerebral  neurons  present  and  that  further  de 
velopment was  limited  to  some  synaptic  elaboration  of  the  al 
ready  existing  neuronal  network.  Recent  studies  performed 
with  radio  tracers  have  revealed,  however,  that  at  least  in  the 
hippocampus,  olfactory  bulb,  and  cerebellar  cortex  of  mam 
mals, as many as 8o to go per cent of the neurons form  only after 
the  animal  is  born  (3).  Experience  provided  by  sensory  inputs 
from  the  environment  influences  the  number  as  well  as  the 
structual  connections  of  these  postnatal  cells.  Moreover,  as 
Cajal  (25)  suggested  long ago,  the microneurons of the cerebel-
1 urn,  which  serve  as  association  elements,  develop  after  birth 
under the influence of the infant's  behavioral activities.  There 
fore it can be said that the environment is  absorbed as  a  struc- 
tural part of the neurons in the developing brain. 

The conclusive  proof  that  performance  of neonate  behavior 
does  not  require  a  mind-or  even  a  brain--derives  from  the 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

study of several  anencephalic  beings  in whom reflexes  and  be 
havioral  manifestations . were similar to  those  of normal babies. 
Some  of  these  infants,  hom without  cerebrums,  lived  for  only 
one or  two  days,  but others  survived  for  two  or  more  months 
and could  be  studied  in great detail.  One  of  the  most  famous 
cases  was  the  mesencephalic  child  which  had  only  midbrain, 
pons,  and  cerebellum,  lacked  pallidum,  striatum,  and  cortex, 
and had only a  few  traces of diencephalon (84).  This abnormal 
being had reduced motor performance,  but the  startle reaction 
and  grasping  reflexes  were  well  preserved.  He  was  able  to  as 
sume  a  sitting  position  spontaneously  when  both  lower  legs 
were  pressed,  and  occasionally  he  yawned  and  stretched  his 
arms.  He  had  periodic  alternating  states  of  quietude  and  ac 
tivity  resembling  sleep  and  wakefulness.  His  feeding  behavior 
was  nearly  normal  and  he  could  follow  a  moving  finger  with 
his eyes and head. He cried and was observed to suck his thumb 
spontaneously.  The main difference  between  anencephalic  and 
normal  infants is  that in a child lacking cortex and other parts 
of the  brain, responses and activities remain stationary while  a 
normal infant quickly develops new behavior patterns. 

Having seen that mental functions  in man cannot be demon 
strated  at  birth,  we  may  ask  which  elements  are  essential  for 
their  appearance  and  development,  and  we  may  wonder  why 
the  newborn  baby  is  mindless.  Why  isn't  the  mind  detectable 
at birth?  Because  it is  hidden  or dormant  inside  the  neurons, 
or because it doesn't yet exist within  the brain? These questions 
correspond  to  the  following  differing  hypotheses:  (•)  Human 
beings,  in  comparison  with  other  animals,  are  less  developed 
at birth,  being anatomically and  physiologically  immature and 
requiring  a  postnatal  growing  period  in  order  to  reach  their 
expected  potential.  In  this  case,  the  essential  elements  for  the 
appearance  of the  mind, which  are  determined  genetically,  are 
already  present  at  birth,  and  only  need  time  to  develop  and 
demonstrate  their existence.  The  mind  is  there  even  if  it can 
not be detected.  (2)  A  different  point of view  is  that  the  brain 
is  not  sufficient  to  produce  mental  phenomena.  The  brain  is 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comTHE  MINDLESS,  NEWBORN  BRAIN 

only a  reactive  organizer of  transactions  of elements  located  in 
the  environment  and  transmitted  to  the  individual  by  sensory 
receptors  and  pathways.  According  to this  hypothesis,  the  re 
ception  of  extracerebral  factors-the  experience  of  living-is 
essential for  the appearance of the mind and is the basic element 
upon  which  mental  development  is  conditional.  While  in 
stinctive behavior may appear even in the absence of experience, 
mental activity cannot. 

Confronting these  two  theories,  we  face  again  the basic ques 
tions of the origin of mind and whether mental functions could 
appear  simply  by  process  of  anatomical  maturation.  To  find 
answers,  we  must  be  acquainted with  some  experimental  facts. 
It is  known that cerebral maturity in animals is of only relative 
value  for  behavioral  performance.  With  merely  20  per cent of 
their  neurons  myelinated,  24-day-old  white  rats  are  trainable 
and  can  learn  associations  as  well  as  adult  rats  (236).  Early 
visual  experience  is  important  for  the  normal  development  of 
higher animals but is  not essential in lower species.  Rats raised 
in darkness since birth have no visual deficits  when exposed  to 
light  for  the  first  time  (101).  Birds  also  manage  quite  well, 
although  ringdoves  which  have  worn  translucent  goggles  to 
block  visual  patterns  but  not  light show  a  moderate  decrease 
in  the  speed  of  learning  pattern  discrimination  when  their 
goggles  are  removed  (207). 

Studies  of  early  visual  deprivation  in  higher  animals  tell  a 
different  story.  In  one  investigation,  four . baby  chimpanzees 
were separated from  their mothers shortly after  birth and each 
was  kept  in  a  darkened  room  and  given  only  ninety  minutes' 
daily  exposure  to  a  limited,  diffuse  light  (184).  Seven  months 
later,  testing of the  animals showed normal  pupillary reactions 
to  light,  but  lack  of  eye  blink,  visual  fixation,  and  pursuit  of 
moving objects.  Unlike  the control animals,  these  chimpanzees 
did not appear upset if they were fed  by strangers, nor did they 
recognize  their  feeding  bottles.  In  visual  discrimination  and 
conditioning  tests,  the  animals  reared  in  darkness  required 
more  than  twice  as  many  trials  as  did  the control  animals  and 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

52 
committed  over  twice  as  many  errors.  After  living  for  31/2 
months  outside  the  darkened  :room,  only  one  of  the  chimpan 
zees  began  to converge his  eyes  on an object brought into con 
tact  with  his  lips.  In  this  animal,  discrimination  of  vertical 
versus  horizontal  strips  was  soon  acquired,  while  recognition 
of faces  took much longer. 

Biochemical  studies  have  confirmed  the  importance  of  sen 
sory  stimulation  for  normal  cerebral  development.  In  animals 
deprived of sight or hearing,  the corresponding neurons  of  the 
system  do  not  develop  biochemically.  Their  structure  appears 
normal,  but inside  they  are  like  "empty  bags,  impoverished  in 
both  RNA  and  proteins"  (115).  The  importance  of  adequate 
sensory  stimulation  for  postnatal  neurochemical  maturation 
has also been demonstrated by Brattgard in his studies of retinal 
ganglion  cells  (22).  During the  early  postnatal  period,  animals 
receiving normal light stimulation showed 100 per cent increase 
in  cellular  mass,  as  measured  by  the  total  amount  of  organic 
substance,  while  animals  deprived  of  light  did  not  show  this 
change.  Moderate  sensory  stimulation  of  the  vestibular  system 
caused by rotation of the body resulted in a 40 per cent increase 
in the  RNA concentration  in  the vestibular ganglion  cells  and . 
also an increase in amino acid absorption (91). 

During the last fifteen  years, researchers at Berkeley (13,  132, 
190) have performed chemical-behavioral studies demonstrating 
that  individual experience  can  lead  to  measurable  alterations 
of the  chemistry  and  anatomy  of  the  brain.  They started  with 
the search  for relations between naturally occurring differences 
in brain chemistry and differences  in  learning ability  and  then 
analyzed  the  effects  of  experience  on  brain  chemistry.  It was 
known  that  enriched  early  sensory  inputs  benefit  subsequent 
learning,  and  the  investigations  were  oriented  to  find  the  bio 
chemical  link  between  early  environment  and  later  effects. 
Experimental  studies  in  rats  proved  that  exposing  litter  mates 
to  either  enriched  or  impoverished  environments  for  eight 
days  produced  in  the  enriched  group  significant  increases  in 
( 1)  the weight of cerebral cortex, ( 2)  total activity of the enzyme 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comTHE  MINDLESS,  NEWBORN  BRAIN 

53 
acetylcholine  esterase  throughout the  brain,  (3)  total activity of 
cholinesterase  in  the  cortex,  (4)  thickness  and  vascularization 
of the cerebral cortex.  Because acetylcholine is a  possible  trans 
mitter  substance,  changes  in  the  enzymes  which  regulate  its 
appearance  and  breakdown  have  important  functional  signifi 
cance.  Increase  in  the  number  and  connections  of  neurons 
should  also  have  obvious  consequences.  Many  years  ago,  the 
great  Spanish  histologist  Cajal  (25)  suggested  that  cerebral  ac 
tivity  could  be  correlated  with  the  ramifications  of  cerebral 
neurons, and he drew attention to the small cells rich in synaptic 
connections.  The  total  brain  mass  should  be  less  important 
than its  internal organization and wealth of connections for  the 
exchange of information.  Ca jal knew  that a  talented person or 
even  a  genius  did  not  necessarily  have  a  large  brain.  Quality 
rather than  total  volume is  crucial. 

It is  generally accepted  that  the  brain of  a  newborn  human 
baby is  incomplete to a  remarkable degree  (41,  76,  118).  In the 
primary  sensory  areas  and  the  motor  cortex,  many  character 
istics including myelination, cortical width, and the number and 
size of cells are in an embryonic state. While anatomical matura 
tion  must  influence  brain  functions,  it  is  doubtful  whether  it 
is  the  decisive  factor  in  mental  activity.  The  limited  role  of 
maturation  is  illustrated by  the  behavior of  premature  babies, 
born after seven months of intrauterine life.  Two months after 
birth,  their  reactions  are  more  similar  to  those  of  a  normal, 
full-term  two-month-old baby than to a newborn. It is  also true 
that  although  the  pyramidal  tract · does  not  mature  for  two 
years, children are able to coordinate, walk, and perform volun 
tary  movements  many months before. 

If a  human  being  could  grow  physically  for  several  years 
under  complete  sensory  deprivation,  it  could . be  ascertained 
whether  the  appearance  of  mental  activity  is  dependent  upon 
extragenetic,  extracerebral  elements.  My  prediction  is  that 
such a being would not have mental functions.  His brain would 
be empty and void of ideas;  he would be without memory and 
incapable  of  understanding  his  surroundings.  Such  a. person, 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF THE  MIND 

54 
although maturing physically,  would remain as  mentally naive 
as  on  the  day  of his  birth;  This  experiment  is,  of · course,  un 
feasible.  It  would  be unacceptable  ethically,  and  it  is  techni 
cally impossible because even if sight, sound, taste, and olfaction 
could  be  blocked,  touch  and  viseeral  proprioception  extend 
throughout most of the body and could not be completely sup 
pressed.  Although  the  final  proof of  this  extreme  experiment 
will  never  be  forthcoming,  we  have  partial  medical  proof  of 
the  adverse  effects . of· sensory  deprivation  on  physiological  de 
velopment of children~ 

It is known that people who have lived for several years with 
out a  sensory  receptor lack  the mental  functions  related  to. the 
receptor  that  must transduce,  bias,  and  pass  on  the  incoming 
information.  Some  babies  have  ·been  born  with  congenital 
cataracts in both eyes  but have · not suffered atrophy of the optic 
nerve.  They grow up without any visual  experience  of shapes, 
objects,  or patterns,  being able to perceive  only  diffused  light. 
During  childhood,  they  learn  to  recognize  surroundings  by 
touch  and  by  eat.  They  can  identify  a  book,  glass,  or  chair, 
and  know  people -.  by  their footsteps  or voices.  When  some  of 
these  blind  children  were  twelve  to fourteen  years  old,  their 
cataracts  were  removed,. and for  the  first  time  they  could  see 
the physical world.  During the first  days,  this visible world had 
no  significance,  and  familiar  objects  such  as  a  walking  stick 
or favorite chair were recognized onlywhen explored manually. 
A  tedious learning process  was necessary  before  these  children 
could  learn  to  evaluate  lights  and  shades  and  interpret  the 
barrage  of  optic sensations  which  were  initially  so  confusing. 
After a  long training period  their visual  recognition  improved 
considerably,  but  it remained  permanently  impaired.  For  ex 
ample, the distinction between a  square and a hexagon required 
laborious and often  erroneous manual counting of the corners, 
and  a  rooster . was  confused  with  a  horse  because  both  have 
tails  (202 ).  A  very  intelligent  blind  boy, , whose  sight  was  re 
stored when he was  eleven,  identified a  fish  as  a  camel  because 
he confused its dorsal  fin  with a camel's hump  (239).  Although 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com:THE  MINDLESS,  NEWBORN  BRAIN 

55 
this clinical data is  based on a small number of patients some of 
whom may have had brain lesions as  well as  cataracts (243),  the 
results  indicate  that  the  ability  to  perceive  patterns  does  not 
pre-exist  in  cerebral  organization,  btU  is  learned  through  ex 
perience,  and  that  in  man  the  early  postnatal  period  is  of  de 
cisive importance in the acquisition of cerebral mechanisms for 
the  perception  and symbolization  of  sensory  stimuli_ 

In agreement with the results of visual deprivation in patients 
is  the very  poor performance of native  African  children  in  the 
form  board  intelligence  test  (162).  The  natives  were  far  su 
perior  to  white  men  in  detecting  hunting  tracks  in  the  forest 
but  were  completely  unfamiliar  with  and  unable  to  discrimi 
nate  between  the  geometrical  patterns  used  in the  test.  These 
findings  illustrate  that  visual  discrimination  is  one  mental 
activity  which  must be learned,  and  that  in  the  human  brain, 
cerebral development and organization are not sufficient for the 
performance  of  mental  functions.  Genetic  factors  are  not 
enough;  experience  is  essential.  "At conception  individuals are 
quite alike in intellectual endowment .. .. It is  the life  experi 
ence  and  the  sociocultural  milieu  influencing  biological  and 
psychological  function  which  .  .  .  makes  human  beings  sig 
nificantly different from each other" ( 170). 

The decisive role of infantile experiences in the development 
of individual  personality and  its disorders was  the main  theme 
of  Freud's  historic  investigations  (So),  which  have  shaped  the 
thinking of psychologists,  psychiatrists;  psychoanalysts,  and  lay 
men to the present time. The central experience of the period of 
childhood  is  the  infant relation  to  his  mother,  and  the  events 
of  the  first  years  leave  a  much  greater  mark ·on  physiological 
and  behavioral  characteristics  than  those  which  occur  later  in 
life.  Piaget  also  has  stressed  that  the  first  eighteen  months  of 
life  are  crucial  for  the  establishment  of sensory  motor  intelli 
gence and for  the formation of the ego  ( 177). 

Perhaps the most dramatic evidence  that the capacity to  love 
is  not  inherited  but  may  appear  "at  first  sight"  is  the  process 
of  imprinting.  As  Lorenz  (149)  has  shown,  the  young  of some 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

bird  species  become  attached  to  the  first  moving  object  they 
perceive.  Normally this  object is  their mother,  but in his work 
with ducks,  Lorenz  presented himself at the moment  of hatch 
ing  as  the  mother  substitute.  The  little  ducklings  were  im 
printed  with  the  image  of  Dr.  Lorenz  and  followed  him 
obediently with apparent filial  affection. The strength of bonds 
established in the young depend on the qualities of the stimulus 
(shape, sounds, odors) and on the timing of the reception. In the 
duck,  the  most  effective  imprinting  takes  place  soon  after 
hatching,  while  beyond  a  certain  age  it  cannot  take  place  at 
all. 

The studies  of the  Harlows  (92,  94)  in rhesus  monkeys  con 
firmed  the  decisive  importance  of  early  sensory  inputs  as  de 
terminants  of  behavior  and  also  the  existence  of  a  critical 
period  early  after  birth  for  establishment  of  the  capacity  for 
affection. Deprivation incurred by isolating baby monkeys from 
their mothers or peers irreversibly blighted the animals' capacity 
for social adjustments.  The period between  the  third and sixth 
months  was  found  to  be  most  critical  for  their  development. 
Animals deprived of contact during this  phase  exhibited aber 
rant behavi~r which persisted throughout their adulthood even 
when  they were  placed within  control  groups.  The  behavioral 
abnormalities  included  staring  fixedly  into  space,  stereotyped 
motility,  clasping  their heads  in  their hands,  rocking  for  long 
periods of time,  development. of compulsive  habits,  self-aggres 
sive  tendencies  with  self-inHicted  body  damage,  and  abnormal 
sexuality  with  unsuccessful  mating.  In  monkeys  the  ability  to 
love  is  not inherited and if it  is  not learned  during early  life, 
the  deprived  individual  forever  loses  the  capacity  to  establish 
bonds of affection and remains socially and sexually aberrant. 

In  another  series  of  experiments,  it  was  demonstrated  that 
"the ability to  solve  problems without  fumbling  is  not inborn 
but is  acquired gradually"  (93).  When monkeys  faced  a  simple 
discrimination  test  such  as  selection  of  an  object  according  to 
its color or shape for  the reward of raisins  or peanuts,  learning 
was  initially haphazard.  After the animals  had  learned  to solve 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comTHE  MINDLESS,  NEWBORN  BRAIN 

57 
several  similar  problems,  their  behavior  changed  dramatically 
and they showed increasing insight until eventually, when faced 
with a new problem, they could solve it in a single trial. Parallel 
studies  have  been  performed  with  children  showing  that  in 
man, as  in monkeys,  there is  no evidence of any  innate endow 
ment  that  enables  them  to  solve  instrumental  problems.  The 
conclusions of these findings  are that "animals, human and sub 
human,  must learn  to  think.  Thinking does  not develop  spon 
taneously  as  an  expression  of  innate  abilities;  it  is  the  end 
result of a long learning process," and that "the brain is essential 
to  thought,  but  the  untutored  brain  is  not enough,  no  matter 
how  good  a  brain  it  may  be"  (93). 

The classical controversy about the nature-nurture dichotomy 
has  lost  its  original  simplicity.  The  problem  is  not  to  separate 
innate from  learned  behavioral  patterns,  because  in most cases 
there is a reciprocal influencebetween pre-existing and acquired 
factors.  The problem is  to identify the specific roles and mecha 
nisms in the collaborative effort between heredity and environ 
ment (102,  227).  To be specific,  let us consider language as  the 
most  outstanding  manifestation  of  human  mental  qualities. 
The potentiality to  talk depends on genetic factors  which  exist 
in  man  at  the  moment  of birth,  while  they  are lacking  in  the 
rest  of the  zoological  scale,  including the  big apes.  It is  known 
that  after  the  most  patient  training,  some  chimpanzees  living 
with  human  foster  parents  have  been able  to  pronounce  a  few 
simple  words  such  as  "papa''  and  "mama"  and  "cup,"  but 
they  have  never learned  to converse  or  to  say complex  phrases. 
Language  potentiality  in  the  human  baby  signifies  the  exist 
ence of a functioning brain that can  be trained to store informa 
tion  and  also  to  combine,  modify,  and  use  it  for  performance 
of the specific function of talking. Potentiality is like a beautiful 
highway, able to accommodate traffic and facilitate the exchange 
of  visitors  among  many  cities.  The  highway,  however,  cannot 
create cars,  trucks,  merchandise,  businessmen,  workers,  and  all 
the  life  which  circulates  along  it.  The  road  makes  functions 
possible,  but  by  itself  it  is  a  useless  stretch  of  pavement.  The 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

potential  of  verbal  communication  is  not  enough  to  learn  to 
talk,  and it is  necessary  to be repeatedly exposed  to sensory  in 
puts  from  an environment  which  includes  family  and  friends. 
The baby brain does  not  invent language  nor can  it choose  to 
learn  either  English  or  Chinese:  It is  entirely  dependent  on 
information  which  must  come  from  the  outside.  The  genetic 
structure  of  the  individual  establishes  the  mechanisms  for  re 
ceiving  and  handling  the  inputs,  and  in  the  case  of  language 
it  may  also  be responsible  for  the  modulation  of accessory  ele 
ments of speech, such as  tone and inflexion of voice, and for the 
facilitation  of  some  tendencies  related  to  learning  of  words 
and formation  of concepts,  but if a  baby is  not exposed  to lan 
guage,  then  there  are  no  materials  to  be  received,  modulated 
or facilitated,  and his  potentialities will  temain  dormant. 

This is  true for  many other mental  functions  which  will  not 
appear  in  the  absence  of  appropriate  sensory  inputs.  An  im 
portant  point  is  that  the  choice  of  the  necessary  information 
cannot be made  by the  baby  himself  because  at the  beginning 
he is  completely helpless and dependent.  The decisive  responsi 
bilities of providing information to structure the initial organi 
zation of the  baby's mind is  assumed by  those  in charge  of  the 
infant.  As  stated  by  Geertz  (85),  "there  is  no  such  thing  as  a 
human  nature  independent  of  culture.  Men  without  culture 
would not be the clever savages of Golding's Lord Q[  the Flies. 
They  would  not  be,  .  .  .  as  classical  anthropological  theory 
would imply, intrinsically talented apes who had somehow failed 
to  find  themselves.  Instead,  they  would  be  monstrosities  with 
few  useful  instincts,  fewer  recognizable  sentiments,  and  no 
intellect." 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com7 

Sensory  Dependence of the Adult Mind 

Even if reception  of  sensory  information is  accepted  as  totally 
essential  for  the  onset  and  development  of  mental  functions, 
it  is  more  or  less  explicitly  assumed · that  an  adult has  a  well 
established  mental  capacity  which  functions  withrelative  in 
dependence  of  the  environment.  Individuality,  initiative,  and 
free  will  are  expressed  in  the  ability  to  accept  or  reject  ideas 
and  select  behavioral  responses.  A  man., can  isolate  himself, 
meditate,  and  explore  the  depths  of  his  own  thoughts.  To ·a 
great  extent  education,  especially  in  Occidental  cultures,  is 
based  on  the  belief  that  individual  personality  is  a  self-con 
tained  and relatively independent entity with  its  own destiny, 
well differentiated from  the surroundings, a11d  able to function 
by  itself  even  when  isolated  from  earth  al).d  traveling  in  an 
orbiting capsule. 

A  more  detailed  analysis  of reality,  however,  shows  that 
cerebral activity is  essentially dependent on sensory inputs .from 
the  environment  not  only  at  birth  but  also  throughout  life. 
Normal  mental  functions  cannot  be  preserved  in  the  absence 
of a stream of information coming from the outside world.  The 
mature brain, with all its wealth of past experience and acquired 
skills,  is  not  capable  of maintaining  the  thinking  process  or 
even  normal  awareness  and  reactivity  in  a  vacu,um  of  sensory 
deprivation:  The  individual  mind  i~  not self-sufficient. 

Support  for  this  statement  derives  from  neurophysiological 
and  psychological  experimentation;  In  mammals;  the  central 

59 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com6o 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

organization of motor activity  is  localized  in special  regions  of 
the  cerebral  cortex  where  muscles  and  ideokinetic  formulas 
are  represented.  The  motor  pathways  descend  through  the 
spinal cord and emerge through the ventral roots to form plexus 
and motor nerves. As should be expected, experimental destruc 
tion  in  animals or  pathological  damage  in man  of  the  ventral 
roots  produces  complete  motor  paralysis  because  the  cerebral 
impulses cannot reach the muscle target.  Considering the input 
side,  we  know that all sensory information from  the  periphery, 
including proprioceptive  impulses  from  the  muscles,  is  carried 
by the dorsal roots of the spinal cord. As anticipated, destruction 
of all  dorsal  roots produces a  loss  of sensation,  but in addition, 
there  is  also  a  paralysis  of  the  musculature  as  pronounced  as 
when the motor roots are interrupted. These experiments show 
that  in  the  absence  of  sensory  information,  motor  activity  is 
totally disrupted.  The brain and motor pathways  are  not suffi 
cient in themselves, and for  proper motor behavior,  sensory  in 
puts are  absolutely  necessary. 

The studies  of Sprague  et al.  (217)  in  the  cat  confirmed  the 
importance  of  incoming  information  for  normal  functioning 
of the brain. These authors destroyed  the lateral  portion of the 
upper  midbrain,  including  the  main  sensory  pathways,  and 
they  observed  that,  in  addition  to  the  expected  marked  sen 
sory  deficit,  the  cats  exhibited  a  lack  of affect,  aggression,  and 
pleasurable responses,  and did not solicit  petting.  The animals 
remained  mute,  expressionless,  and  showed  minima!  autoc 
nomic  responses  but  in  spite  of  this  passivity,  they  showed 
hyperexploratory activity with incessant stereotyped wandering, 
sniffing, and searching as  if hallucinating.  "Without a  p~tterned 
afferent  input to  the forebrain  via  the  lemnisci,  the  remaining 
portions .of  the  central  nervous  system  ... seem  incapable  of 
elaborating a  large  part of  the  animal's  repertoire  of  adaptive 
behavior"  (217). 

Psychological  data  also  confirm  the  essential  importance  of 
continuous reception of inputs.  Experiments  on  sensory  depri 
vation  in  animals  and  man  have  shown  that  maintenance  of 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comSENSORY  DEPENDENCE  OF  THE  ADULT  MIND 

61 

normal  mental  activity  is  difficult  or  impossible  when  sensory 
information  is  reduced  and,  moreover,  that  monotonous  sen 
sation  is  aversive.  Animals  and  humans  require  novelty  and 
continual and varied stimulation from  their surroundings. 

Perception of the environment has positive reinforcing proper 
ties,  and  when  monkeys  were  confined  in  a  cage,  they  would 
press  levers  and  perform  other  instrumental  responses  for  the 
reward  of opening a  little  window  and  looking  at  the  outside 
world.  Curiosity  derives  from  expectancy  of  novel  sensory 
stimulation and motivates exploratory behavior in both animals 
and  man,  while  boredom  has  negative  reinforcing  properties 
and is related to the absence of novel sensory inputs (16, 95).  To 
be  entertained  means  to  be  provided  with  new  and  changing 
sensations, mainly visual and auditory.  Primitive man probably 
d~rived pleasure from looking at the changing beauty of nature, 
which  retains  its  fascination  to  the  present  day.  Civilization 
has  provided  the  technical  means  for  a  far  greater  choice  of 
inputs, and a  major portion of our time, effort,  mental activity, 
and  economic  resources  are  now  devoted  to  entertainment 
through  books,  theaters,  radio,  television,  museums,  and other 
cultural  media. 

Symbolically  we  may  speak  about  "psychic  energy"  as  the 
level of intracerebral activity which could perhaps be identified 
in neurophysiological terms by electrical and chemical processes 
located at specific  neuronal  fields.  This psychic  energy  may  be 
considered a main determinant of the quantity of intellectual and 
behavioral manifestations. While this energy obviously depends 
on  cerebral  physiology  (and  indirectly  on  the  health  of  the 
whole  body),  its  actual  source  is  extracerebral  because  mental 
activity  is  not a  property  of  neurons,  but  is  contingent  on  the 
received  information  which  activates  stored  information  and 
past experiences, creating emotions and ideas. 

To be  alone  with  our own  mind  is  not  enough.  Even  if  all 
past experiences are included,  the exclusion of new perceptions 
creates  serious  functional  difficulties.  This  has  been  shown  for 
instance in the studies of Hebb and his group (18,  103) in which 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

college students were asked to lie comfortably on beds in sound 
proof, lighted cubicles, wearing translucent goggles to minimize 
optic sensation and gloves  with cardboard cuffs  to limit tactual 
perception.  The  purpose  of  this  isolation  experiment  was  not 
to cut out all  sensory stimulation,  but only  to  remove  patterns 
and  symbolic  information.  Most  of  the  subjects  expected  to 
spend  their  idle  time . alone  reviewing  their  studies,  planning 
term  papers,  or  organizing  ideas  for  lectures.  The  surprising 
result-for  the  investigators  as  well  as  for  the  participants 
was  that  the students "were  unable  to  think clearly  about any 
thing for any length of time,  and  their thought process  seemed 
to  be affected  in other ways."  After  several  hours  of isolation, 
many of them began to see  images, such as  "a rock shaded by a 
tree,"  "a procession ofsquirrels," or "prehistoric animals  walk 
ing about in a jungle." Initially the subjects were surprised and 
amused  but after a  while  their  hallucinations  became  disturb 
ing  and  vivid  enough  to  interfere  with  sleep.  The  students 
had  little  control  over  these  phenomena  which,  in  some  cases, 
included  acoustic  as  well  as  optic  perceptions  such  as  people 
talking,  a  music  box  playing,  or a  choir singing  in full  stereo 
phonic sound.  Some  subjects  reported  sensations  of  movement 
or  touch,  or feelings  of "otherness,"  or  that  another  body  was 
lying beside  them on the bed.  Isolation also  tended  to  increase 
the  belief  in  supernatural  phenomena  and  several  of  the  stu 
dents  reported  that  for  a few  days  after  their  isolation  experi 
ment,  they were . afraid that  they  were  going  to  see  ghosts.  The 
conclusion  was  that  "a  changing  sensory  environment  seems 
essential for human beings. Without it, the brain ceases to func 
tion in an adequate way and abnormalities of behavior develop" 
(103)· 

In  patients  with  long-term  hospital  confinement  in  bed  or 
in an iron lung or body cast,  psychotic-like  symptoms  have  ap 
peared  including  anxiety,  delusions,  and  hallucinations  which 
did  not  respond  to  standard  medical  or  psychiatric  treatment 
but were easily alleviated by social  contact or by sensory stimu 
lation  from  a  radio  or television  set  (141). 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comSENSORY  DEPENDENCE  OF  THE  ADULT  MIND 

63 

In  our  century  the  classic  punishment  of  solitary  confine 
ment  has  been  combined  with  sleep  deprivation  and  used  in 
psychological warfare.  Exhaustion and decreased sensory inputs 
are  known  to  cause  mental  disturbances  and  reduce  defense 
mechanisms, and they have been effectively manipulated during 
"brainwashing"  or  "thought  reform"  procedures  to  indoctri 
nate  prisoners  ( 143,  244). 

The literature on sensory deprivation isvoluminous (197) and 
shows conclusively that the cerebral cortex requires a stream of 
stimulation for the  preservation .of behavioral and mental  nor 
mality.  We  should  realize,  therefore,  that  our  cerebral  and 
mental  functions  rely  on  the  umbilical  cord  of sensory  inputs 
and  become disrupted  if  isolated  from  the  environment.  This 
fact  has been recognized  by philosophers· and is  reflected in the 
words of Ortega y Gasset (167) who wrote:  "Man has no nature; 
what he  has  is  a  history,"  and  "I am  I  and my  circumstance." 
The recognition  of environmentalinputs as  a  part of personal 
identity  is  one  of  the  important  contributions  of  Ortega,  and 
this  idea  is  presented in Meditations  on  Quixote  (166),  when 
one  of  the  characters  states  that  "circumstantial  reality  forms 
the other half of my person,'' and "reabsorption of circumstances 
is  the specific  destiny  of man."  A  similar  thoqght is  expressed 
in Tennyson's poem "Ulysses" when  Ulysses  says,  "I am a  part 
of all  that I  have met." 

Ortega's position is  important to philosophical  thinking,  but 
we  should  probably  go  further  and  question  the  existence  of 
that  half  of  personal  identity  thought  not to originate  in  the 
environment. If we could erase all individual history, all circum 
stances  and  experiences,  would there  be  al}ything  left  of  our 
personality? The brain would remain and. neuronal nets would 
perhaps continue their spiking activity, but devoid of history 
of past experiences and knowledge-there could  be  no  mental 
activity and the mind would,  in fact,  be an Aristotelian  tabula 
rasa.  Let  us  remember  with  Dobzhansky  (64)  that  "genes  de 
termine  not  'characters'  or  'traits'  but reactions  or  response." 
The  frame  of  reference  and  the  building  blocks  of  our  per-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

sonality are  the  materials  received  from  the  outside.  The  role 
of  cerebral  mechanisms,  which  to  a  great  extent  are  also  de 
termined  by  previous  experience,  is  to  receive,  bias,  combine, 
and  store  the  received  information,  but  not  to  create  it.  Orig 
inality is  the discovery of novel associations  between previously 
received information. We must realize that the anatomical struc 
ture of the brain has not evolved perceptibly in the past several 
millenniums of man's history;  what has changed is  the amount 
of  information  received  by  the  brain  and  the  training  to  deal 
with it. The rna jor differences between a cave man and a modern 
scientist are  not genetic  but environmental  and  cultural. 

For centuries  philosophical  tradition  has  accepted  the  exist 
ence  of  the  "1,"  "soul,"  or  "ego"  as  an  entity,  more  or  less 
metaphysical,  relatively  independent  of  the  environment  (and 
perhaps even of the genes),  which  is  the  "essence"  that endows 
individual man with his unique personal identity and character 
istics,  and  may  later be  threatened  or disallowed  by  the  social 
medium. 

The  concept  of  this  mythical  "I"  is  so  strong  that  it  has 
permeated the thinking of authors as original and revolutionary 
as  Marcuse.  In  One-dimensional  Man  ( 151 ),  he  distinguishes 
between  true and false  needs,  declaring: 

False  are  those  which  are  superimposed  upon  the  individual  by 
particular social interest in his repression .... Most of the prevailing 
needs  to  relax,  to  have  fun,  to  behave  and  consume  in  accordance 
with the advertisements, to love and hate what others love  and hate, 
belong  to  the category  of  false  needs  ... which  are  determined  by 
external  forces  over  which  the  individual  has  no  control.  .  .  .  The 
only  needs  that  have  an  unqualified  claim  for  satisfaction  are  the 
vital  ones--nourishment,  clothing,  lodging. 

According  to  Marcuse,  inner  freedom  "designates  the  private 
space in which man may become and remain 'himself.' ... Today 
the  private space  has been  invaded and whittled down  by  tech 
nological reality.'' 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comSENSORY  DEPENDENCE  OF  THE  ADULT MIND 

65 

The basic questions are obviously, Who is  this "himself," and 
what is  the origin of its structural elements?  Is  there any way  to 
provide  the  experience  which  will  form a  baby's  mind  except 
by means of the "external powers"  of parents, teachers,  and cul 
ture over which  the baby has no control? Are we  then going to 
classify  a  child's  needs  as  false  because  they  were  inculcated? 
Where is  the inner man? 

Marcuse's  pleas  for  "intellectual  freedom"  and  his  criticism 
of  "material  and  intellectual  needs  that  perpetuate  obsolete 
forms  of the struggle for  existence"  are certainly valid,  but the 
state  of unqualified liberty cannot be supposed  to  exist for  the 
infant  who  is  totally  dependent  physically  and  psychologically 
on his surroundings. Freedom must be taught and created. 

The mutual  dependence  of  the  individual  and  the  "psychic 
environment" or "noosphere" has been elaborated by Teilhard 
de  Chardin  (223),  who  wrote  that  the  Universal  and  Personal 
"grow  in  the  same  direction  and  culminate  simultaneously  in 
each  other,  . . .  "  the  "Hyper-Personal"  consciousness  at  the 
"Omega point."  While  it is  true  that  each  of us  personally re 
ceives, interprets, and feels the world around us, why should our 
individual half be opposed to the noospheric half?  Teilhard de 
Chardin,  like  Ortega  y  Gasset  and  most · other  philosophers, 
accepts  the  existence  of  the  quasi-mystical,  inviolable  self,  an 
entity  somehow  identified  with  the  individual  mind,  ego,  or 
personality, which  is  related to the environment but has  a  rela 
tively  independent existence. 

Recent neurophysiological and psychological studies discussed 
here  reveal  that  this  is  not  the  case.  The  origin  of  memories, 
emotional  reactivity,  motor skills,  words,  ideas,  and  behavioral 
patterns which constitute our personal self can be traced to out 
side of the individual.  Each  person  is  a  transitory composite  of 
materials borrowed from  the environment, and his  mind  is  the 
intracerebral  elaboration  of  extracerebral 
information.  The 
"personal half" is  a  regrouping of elements of the environment. 
For the final  result,  which  is  manifested as  individual reactivity 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com66 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

and behavioral responses,  the building blocks  from  culture are 
more decisive  than the individual substratum within which  the 
regrouping is performed. 

It  is  impressive  that  this  is  actually  the  philosophy,  as  de 
scribed by Levi-Strauss (142), of the Bororo Indians, a very prim 
itive tribe living by the Vermelho River in the Amazon jungles 
of Brazil. For the Bororo, a  man is  not an Individual but a  part 
of a sociological  universe. Their villages exist "for all  eternity," 
forming  part of the  physical universe along with other animate 
beings, celestial bodies, and meteorological phenomena. Human 
shape is transitory, midway between that of the fish and the arara. 
Human  life  is  merely  a  department of  culture.  Death  is  both 
natural  and  anticultural,  and  whenever  a  native  dies,  damage 
is  inflicted  not only on  his  relatives  but on  society  as  a  whole. 
Nature  is  blamed  and  Nature  must  pay  the  debt;  therefore,  a 
collective  hunt is  organized  to kill  some  sizable  animal,  if  pos 
sible a  jaguar, in order to  bring home its  skin,  teeth,  and nails 
which  will  constitute  the  dead  man's  mori,  his  everlasting  per 
sonal  value. 

The conclusion  that human  beings  are  part  of  culture  does 
not deny the fact that "individuals" have  "individual" reactions 
and that their brains are unique combinations of elements,  but 
s~mply points to the source and quality of the factors of personal 
identity.  The  cerebral  mechanisms  which  allow  us  to  receive, 
interpret, feel,  and react, as  well as  the extracerebral  sources of 
stimuli,  can  and  should  be  investigated  experimentally.  Then 
we shall gain a new awareness of the structure of the  individual 
and its relations with the surrounding noosphere. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com8 

Working  Hypothesis for  the  Experimental 

Study  of the  Mind 

One  of  the  most  important  consequences  of  recent  scientific 
discoveries  is  the new attitude toward the course of human life. 
This attitude has  modified  our  traditional  acceptance  of  fatal 
istic determination by unknown factors related to heredity, body 
functions,  and  environment,  and  has  intensified  the  search  for 
knowledge and technology to direct our lives more intelligently. 
The genetic code is  being unraveled, introducing the possibility 
that  some  time  in  the  future,  we  may  be  able  to  influence 
heredity in order  to avoid illnesses like  Mongolism  or in order 
to  promote  transmission  of specific  anatomical  and  functional 
characteristics.  Neurophysiological  investigation has established 
correlations  between  mental  phenomena  and  physicochemical 
changes  in  the  central  nervous  system,  and  specific  electrical 
responses of different areas of the brain can be identified follow 
ing sensory stimulation of the eye with patterns, shapes, or move 
ments. Advances in other scientific areas have proved that mental 
functions  and  human  behavior  can  be  modified  by  surgery 
(frontal  lobotomy),  by  electronics  (brain  stimulation),  and  by 
chemistry  (drug administration),  thus  placing the  mind within 
experimental reach. 

The ability  to  influence  mental  activity  by direct  manipula 
tion  of  cerebral  structures  is  certainly  novel  in  the  history  of 
man, and present objectives are not only to increase our under-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com68 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

standing  of  the  neurophysiological  basis  of  mind  but  also  to 
influence cerebral mechanisms by means of instrumental manip 
ulation. 

The  working  hypotheses  may  be  summarized  as  follows:  (1) 
There  are  basic  mechanisms  in  the  brain  responsible  for  all 
mental  activities,  including  perceptions,  emotions,  abstract 
thought, social relations, and the most refined artistic creations. 
(2)  These  mechanisms  may  be  detected,  analyzed,  influenced, 
and sometimes substituted for by means of physical and chemical 
technology.  This approach does not claim that love or thoughts 
are  exclusively neurophysiological  phenomena,  but accepts  the 
obvious fact  that the central nervous system is  absolutely neces 
sary  for  any  behavioral  manifestation.  It  plans  to  study  the 
mechanisms  involved.  (3)  Predictable  behavioral  and  mental 
responses  may be induced by direct manipulation of the  brain. 
(4)  We can substitute intelligent and purposeful  determination 
of neuronal functions for blind, automatic responses. 

In any evaluation of experimental results,  we should remem 
ber that there is always a congruence between the methodological 
approach  and  findings  obtained,  in  the  sense  that  if  we  study 
the brain with an oscilloscope, we can expect information about 
spike  potentials  and  other  electrical  data  but  not  about  the 
chemical  composition  of  the  neurons.  Psychological  reactions 
and  behavioral  performance  often  escape  neurophysiological 
methodology,  and  a  coordinated  interdisciplinary  approach  is 
needed.  Music does not exist in a  single note but is  the product 
of  a  spatiotemporal  sequence  of many  sounds.  Mental  activity 
does  not emanate from  the activity  of single  neurons  but from 
the  interaction  of many  neuronal  fields.  Rage,  for  example,  is 
characterized by changes in electrochemical, autonomic, sensory, 
and motor functions  which are overtly expressed  in social  rela 
tions.  Some electrical manifestations of rage have been recorded 
as  discharges at the single  neuronal level,  but the  phenomenon 
involves  multilevel  responses,  and  for  its  proper  investigation 
the whole organism should be observed in a  social  setting. 

The development  of  new  methodology  to  explore  and  com-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comHYPOTHESIS  FOR  EXPERIMENTAL  STUDY  OF THE  MIND  6g 

municate  with  the  depth  of  the  brain while  the  experimental 
subject engages in spontaneous or evoked activities now enables 
the  scientist  to  analyze  and  control  basic  neurological  mecha 
nisms of the mind and represents a unique means of understand 
ing  the  material  and  functional  bases  of  individual  structure. 
The future should see collaboration between those investigators 
who  formerly  studied  neuronal  physiology  while  disregarding 
behavior  and  other  scientists  who  have  been  interested  in  be 
havior while  ignoring  the  brain. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com9 

Historical  Evolution of Physical  Control 

of the  Brain 

EXPERIMENTAL  FACTS 

IMPLICATIONS 

Frog  muscle  contracted  when 
stimuated by electricity. Volta, 
18oo;  Galvani,  1791;  DuBois 
Reymond,  1848. 

Electrical  stimulation  of 

the 
in  anesthetized  dog 
brain 
localized  body  and 
evoked 
limb  movements.  Fritsch  and 
Hitzig,  1870. 

Stimulation of the  diencephalon 
in  unanesthetized  cats  evoked 
well-organized  motor  effects 
and emotional reactions.  Hess, 
1932· 

instrumental 

In single  animals,  learning,  con 
re 

ditioning, 
sponses,  pain,  and  pleasure 
have  been evoked or inhibited 
by electrical stimulation of the 
brain  in  rats,  cats,  and  mon 
keys.  Delgado et al.  1954;  Olds 

"Vital  spirits"  are  not  essential 
for  biological  activities.  Elec 
trical  stimuli  under  man's 
control  can  initiate  and  mod 
ify  vital  processes. 

The brain is excitable. Electrical 
the  cerebral 
stimulation  of 
cortex  can  produce  move 
ments. 

Motor and emotional manifesta 
tions  may  be  evoked  by  elec 
trical  stimulation of the  brain 
in  awake  animals. 

Psychological  phenomena  may 
be  controlled  by  electrical 
stimulation of specific areas of 
the  brain. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comEVOLUTION  OF  PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  BRAIN 

7 1 

Social  behavior  may  be  con 
trolled  by  radio  stimulation 
of  specific  areas  of  the  brain. 

Human  mental  functions  may 
be 
influenced  by  electrical 
stimulation of specific  areas of 
the  brain. 

and  Milner,  1954;  see  bibliog-
raphy in Sheer,  1961. 

In colonies of cats and monkeys, 
aggression, dominance, mount 
ing,  and  other  social  inter 
actions  have  been  evoked, 
modified, or inhibited by radio 
stimulation of specific cerebral 
areas.  Delgado,  1955,  1964. 

In  patients,  brain  stimulation 
during  surgical  interventions 
or  with  electrodes  implanted 
for days or months has blocked 
the thinking process, inhibited 
speech  and  movement,  or 
in other cases has evoked pleas 
ure, laughter, friendliness,  ver 
bal  output,  hostility, 
fear, 
hallucinations,  and  memories. 
Delgado  et  al.  1952,  1968; 
Penfield  and Jasper,  1954;  see 
bibliography  in  Ramey  and 
O'Doherty,  1960. 

Summary 
Autonomic  and  somatic  functions,  individual  and  social  be 
havior,  emotional  and  mental  reactions  may be  evoked,  main 
tained,  modified,  or inhibited,  both in animals and in man,  by 
electrical  stimulation  of  specific  cerebral  structures.  Physical 
control of many brain functions  is  a demonstrated fact,  but the 
possibilities and limits of this control are still little known. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPart  III 

EXPERIMENTAL 
CONTROL  OF  BRAIN 
FUNCTIONS  IN 
BEHAVING  SUBJECTS 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comIn  our present  technological  environment,  we  are  used  to  the 
idea  that machines can be controlled from  a  distance by means 
of radio signals.  The doors of a  garage can be opened or closed 
by pushing a  button  in our car;  the channels  and volume  of a 
television  set  can  be  adjusted  by  pressing  the  corresponding 
knobs of a small telecommand instrument without moving from 
a  comfortable  armchair;  and  even  orbiting  capsules  can  now 
be directed from  tracking stations on earth.  These  accomplish 
ments should familiarize  us  with the idea that we may also con 
trol the biological functions of living organisms from a distance. 
Cats,  monkeys,  or human beings can be induced  to Hex  a  limb, 
to  reject  food,  or  to  feel  emotional  excitement · under  the  in 
fluence of electrical impulses reaching the depths of their brains 
through radio  waves  purposefully sent  by an investigator. 

This reality  has  introduced  a  variety  of scientific  and  philo 
sophical questions, and to understand the significance, potentials, 
and  limitations  of  brain  control,  it  is  convenient  to  review 
briefly the basis  for normal behavioral activity and the method 
ology for its possible artificial modification, and then to consider 
some  representative  examples  of  electrical  control  of  behavior 
in both animals and man. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com10 

Physicochemical  Bases  of Behavioral 

Activity 

In the vegetable as well as  in the animal kingdom,  the dynamics 
of biological  processes  are related  to  ionic movements and elec 
trical  changes  across  the  membranes  which  separate  cells  from 
the  surrounding medium.  For  example,  during  the  process  of 
photosynthesis,  the leaf of a  tree captures  energy  from  the  sun 
and  a  negative  potential  is  created  on  its  receptive  surface.  In 
a  similar  manner,  activation  of  a  squid  axon,  a  frog  muscle, 
or  the  human  brain is  accompanied  by a  negative  wave  which 
invades  cellular  membranes  and  then  disappears.  This  trans 
membrane  change of potential  induces a  flow  of electrical  cur 
rents  into  the  cellular  cytoplasm  and  surrounding  conducting 
fluids. Cellular activity may therefore be investigated by record 
ing  the  electrical  potentials  appearing  across  the  membranes 
or  by  detecting  differences  in  potential  which  appear  in  the 
extracellular  fluid,  even  if  the  recording  electrodes  are  placed 
at a  considerable distance  from  the  electromotive  source.  This 
is  the basic principle of recording electrical  activity of the heart 
(electrocardiogram= EKG)  through  electrodes  placed  on  the 
extremities,  or  of  studying  electrical  potentials  of  the  brain 
(electroencephalogram= EEG)  by  means  of  leads  attached  to 
the  scalp.  If electrodes  are  placed  closer  to  the  source  of  nega 
tivity, for  example in the depth of the brain, recordings  will  be 
more  accurate  and  may  reveal  the  location  of  generators  of 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICOCHEMICAL  BASES  OF  BEHAVIORAL . ACTIVITY 

77 
electrical  activity.  Conversely,  by  using  an  external  potential, 
an electrical  field  may  be  established  through  the extracellular 
fluid,  and some of this current flows  through  the cellular mem 
branes, modifying their charge and permeability and producing 
the  self-propagating  process  called  "stimulation." 

In  order  to  stimulate,  it  is  necessary  to  reduce  quickly  the 
positive charge which normally exists on the surface of a resting 
cell until it reaches a critical point of local depolarization. Then 
the ionic  permeability of the membrane  is  modified,  triggering 
a  pre~established sequence  of  electrical  and chemical  phenom 
ena.  Excitation  takes  place  in  the vicinity  of  the  negative  elec• 
trode (cathode) because the application of negative charges will 
neutralize  the  normally existing  positivity  at  the  external  part 
of  the cellular membrane.  When stimulation is over,  the  posi 
tive polarity is  re-established on the membrane surface with the 
aid  of  energy  provided  by  specific chemical  reactions,  and  the 
cell  is  ready for  a  new stimulation.  The relatively  simple proc 
esses of depolarization and repolarization of cell membranes are 
the  essential  elements  of  neuronal  excitation, .. and . they  are 
responsible  for  the  extraordinary  complexity  of all  behavioral 
performance. 

Our knowledge  gap  between understanding  electrical  events 
at  the  cellular  level  and  deciphering  the  chain  of phenomena 
taking  place  during  the  response  of  a  whole  organism  is  cer 
tainly formidable.  How can  we  explain activities  such  as  walk 
ing,  problem solving,  or  ideation  in  terms  of polarization  and 
repolarization  of  membranes?  Behavior  certainly  cannot occur 
without  concomitant  spike  potentials  and  ionic  exchanges, 
but  the  same  statement  holds  true for  oxygen  and  sugar  con 
sumption, and we must differentiate the mechanisms supporting 
basic nonspecific  cellular  activities,  such  as  metabolic  require 
ments,  fiom  the  mechanisms  more  specifically  related  to  be 
havioral  responses.  Electrical activity  of  the  neurons  seems  to 
have  the dual  role of indicating nonspecific  activity  and  trans 
mitting coded  information. This ability  to  transmit  coded  in 
formation  is  the most important and least  understood  property 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

of the nerve cell, and it represents the functional unit for nervous 
communication. In architecture, given a  number of brick units 
an infinite  number of different houses  can  be constructed.  We 
need to know both the properties of the  individual  bricks  and 
the  pattern  of  their  organization  in  order  to  ascertain  the 
properties and qualities of the final building. The characteristics 
of  behavioral  responses are determined  by  the  combination  of 
many  depolarization  phenomena,  organized  in  space  and  re 
peated sequentially in time. Their arrangement is often so com 
plex that it defies  experimental analysis,  and we must begin by 
examining  very  simple  phenomena.  The  squid  axon  was  for 
years  a  popular  object  of  investigation  in  neurophysiology. 
Great  caution  should  be  observed,  however,  when  applying 
experimental results with that preparation to the understanding 
of  motor  responses  or  mental  activity.  We  should  remember 
that knowledge  of  the  letters  of the  alphabet  will  not explain 
the meaning of a phrase or reveal the beauty of a  poem. 

In  addition  to  investigating  the  spontaneous  changes  in 
membrane potentials,  we  can artificially depolarize  membranes 
by electrical stimulation of cerebral neuronal pools  in order to 
investigate  their functional  organization  and  behavioral  conse 
quences  for  the  whole  organism.  Both  of  these  experimental 
approaches should be used simultaneously in order to correlate 
cellular  functions  with  behavioral  results.  Our  present  knowl 
edge  of  the  physicochemical  bases  of biological  activity,  which 
has an extensive bibliography (23,  182,  203),  permits statement 
of  the  following  principles:  ( 1) All  behavioral  manifestations 
including  their  mental  aspects  require  the  existence  of  waves 
of  negativity  accompanied  by  electrical  and  chemical  changes 
at  the  cellular  level.  (2)  Membrane  depolarization,  artificially 
induced  by  electrical  or  chemical  means,  may  be  followed  by 
observable behavioral manifestations.  (3)  While the complexity 
of these responses is  extraordinary and many of their aspects are 
unknown,  explanations of motor behavior and  psychic  activity 
do not require "vital spirits" or any other metaphysical principle 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICOCHEMICAL  BASES  OF  BEHAVIORAL  ACTIVITY 

79 
because  they  are  related  to  physical  and  chemical  laws  which 
can be investigated experimentally. 

The  classical  experiments  of  Galvani,  showing  that  the  legs 
of a  decapitated frog  contract  in response  to  electrical  stimula 
tion,  are  repeated  many  times  every  year  in  high  school  and 
college  laboratories.  These  simple  experiments  demonstrate 
that a  process  of life,  rimscle  contraction,  can be elicited at the 
will  of  the  investigator  as  many  times  as  electricity  is  applied 
to the tissue.  In the absence of stimulation,  the legs do not con 
tract.  If the  cells  of the muscle  are dead,  excitability  and  con 
tractability are lost and the  preparation does  not respond.  The 
contraction  of  the  frog's  legs  is  similar  regardless  of  whether 
the  muscle  is  stimulated  directly  through  its  motor  nerve  or 
through  the  brain,  and  this  muscle  action  is  also  comparable 
to its activation during voluntary movements of the intact frog. 
The applied electricity does not create the limb movement but 
acts only as a depolarizing agent, starting a chain of events which 
depends on the properties of the stimulated organ. 

The  reliability  and  apparent  simplicity  of  the  muscle  con 
traction  may  be  misleading  because  in  reality  the  contraction 
depends  on  tremendously  complex  processes  which  include: 
depolarization of the resting membrane, changes  in its permea 
bility,  precipitous  exchange  of  potassium,  sodium,  and  otb,er 
ions,  creation of electrical  fields,  reorientation of proteic mole 
cules  within  the  muscle  fiber  with  a  shortening  in  the  length 
of  its  chain,  decomposition  and  synthesis  of  adenosin  triphos 
phate, exchange of phosphoric acids, degradation of hexosaphos 
phate into lactic acid, and many other enzymatic and biochemical 
reactions  which  follow  each  other  according  to  a  genetically 
determined plan within the muscle fiber and independent from 
the agent which initiates them. The mechanisms for  contraction 
and  relaxation  of  the  muscle  fiber  are  pre-established  in  the 
biological  structure  of  the  cells.  Electricity,  like  the  nervous 
system itself, acts as a  trigger  for  these  processes.  This principle 
is  fundamental  for an understanding of the electrical control of 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com8o 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

biological functions. Organisms are composed of a large number 
of  biological  sequences,  some  of  them  inherited  and  others 
learned through experience. When a  chain reaction has started, 
it proceeds according to an intrinsic plan which can be modified 
by feedback or by the arrival of new stimulations. In some cases 
the  trigger  may  be  nonspecific  and,  for  example,  muscular 
contraction  can  be  initiated  by  mechanical,  thermal,  osmotic, 
chemical,  electrical,  or neuronal  stimulation.  In  investigations 
of the brain as  well as  the muscle, electrical activation is  prefer 
able because it is not harmful for the cells and permits repeated 
studies of the same  biological  processes.  By  applying electricity 
we  can  activate  pre-established  functional  mechanisms  of  a 
structure and discover its possible role in spontaneous behavior. 
By  means  of  ESB  (electrical  stimulation  of  the  brain)  it  is 
possible to control a  variety of J~nctions--a movement, a  glan 
dular secretion,  or  a  specific  mental  manifestation,  depending 
on  the  chosen  target.  Necessary  methodology  and  examples  of 
selected results are discussed  in the following chapters. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com11 

Methodology for  Direct  Communication 

with  the  Brain 

The depth  of  the  central  nervous  system  can  be  reached  very 
easily through the natural windows of sensory receptors. Stimuli 
such as patterns of light travel fast from the eye's retina through 
optic pathways to the visual cortex located in the occipital lobe. 
Would  it  be  possible  to  explore  the  local  activity  of  cortical 
neurons  during  the  process  of  symbolic  perception?  Could  we 
evoke similar sensations by direct stimulation of specific neurons? 
Can we reach the mind of an individual without using the nor 
mal  ports  of sensory entry?  Can  we  direct  the  functions  of the 
brain  artificially?  These  and  similar  problems  have  attracted 
the interest of many investigators, but the brain is well protected 
by  layers  of  membranes,  spinal  fluid,  bone,  and teguments,  a 
formidable shield which for  a  long time has  kept  the secrets of 
mental functions away from scientific curiosity. 

Implantation  of Electrodes  in  Animals 

Starting in the last century, many investigators have explored 
the  brain,  first  in  animals  and  recently  in  human  patients  as 
part of diagnosis  and  therapy.  In  these  studies  it was  necessary 
to  open  both  skin  and  skull,  and  because  the  procedure  was 
painful  it  was  mandatory  to  use  anesthesia.  It  blocked  pain 
perception,  but  it  also  inhibited  some  of  the  most  important 

81 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

functions  of  the  nervous  system.  Emotions,  consciousness,  and 
free  behavior were  certainly absent  under  heavy  sedation,  and 
for  many  years  scientists  directed  their  attention  to  sleeping. 
subjects and overlooked the complexity of awake  brains.  Text 
books  of  cerebral  physiology  were  concerned  with  pathways, 
connections, reflexes,  posture, and movement;  mental functions 
and behavior were considered to belong to a different discipline. 
The  methodological  breakthrough  which  made  it  possible 
to study the brain of behaving animals came in the  1930s when 
W. R.  Hess ( 106) devised a  procedure to implant very fine  wires 
within  the  brain of anesthetized  cats.  After  the  effects  of anes 
thesia  had  disappeared,  the  relatively  free  and  normal  animal 
could be electrically stimulated by connecting long leads  to  the 
terminals  of  the  implanted  electrodes.  This  procedure  was 
refined  in  the  early  1950s  (47,  49)  by  reducing  the  size  of  the 
electrodes while increasing the number of intracerebral contacts 
and  using  aseptic  precautions  during  implantation.  Surgical 
accuracy in reaching chosen  cerebral  targets  was  also  improved 
by  means  of  micromanipulators  and  a  precise  system  of  ana 
tomical  coordinates  which  made  it  possible  to  reach  similar 
structures  in  different  subjects.  Using  biologically  inert  mate 
rials  such  as  gold,  platinum,  or  stainless  steel  wires  insulated 
with  teflon  allows  the  electrodes  to  be  left  inside  of  the  brain 
indefinitely.  A  diagram  of  the  cerebral  implantation  of  one 
assembly  of seven contacts is  shown  in Figure  1 and  the  X  ray 
of the head of a  monkey after implantation is  seen  in Figure  2. 
Through a  small  opening  in  the  skull,  the  shaft  is  introduced 
down  to  a  predetermined  depth  and  is  secured  with  dental 
cement at the point where it passes  through the skull.  Then the 
upper  portion  of  the  shaft  is  bent  over  the  bone  surface  and 
secured again a  short distance  away,  and  the  terminal  socket  is 
exteriorized on the head.  Each contact of the socket corresponds 
to  a determined point in the depth of the  brain which  is  acces 
sible  merely by .plugging in a  connector,  a  procedure as  simple 
as  connecting  any  electrical  appliance  to  a  wall  outlet.  This 
technique  has  been  used  for  ESB  in  thousands  of  animals  in 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comFigure  I 
Diagramatic representation of an electrode  assembly  implanted within  the 
brain  and anchored  to  the skull.  The depth of  the  brain  is  thus  accessible 
simply  by  plugging  in  a  connector  (52). 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CO  TROL  OF  THE  MIND 

Figure  2 
X  rays  of  a  monkey's  head  showing  two  assemblies  of  electrodes  implanted 
in  the  frontal  lobes  and  in  the  thalamus  (49) · 

many laboratories around  the world,  and  there  is  ample experi 
ence  of  its  efficiency,  accuracy,  and  safety,  resolving  the  initial 
skepticism  that  introduction  of  wires  into  the  brain  would  be 
technically  difficult,  dangerous  for  the  subject,  and  grossly  dis 
ruptive  of  normal  functions.  It  is  true  that  implantation  of 
electrodes destroys neurons along the path of penetration, break 
ing capillary vessels  and later producing a  local  reaction  involv 
ing the  formation  of a  thin  fibrotic  capsule along  the  implanta 
tion  tract.  It has  been  proven,  however,  that  local  hemorrhage 
is  neglible  and  that  because  of  the  well-known  functional  re 
dundancy of neural  tissue  with abundance of duplication  in its 
circuits,  the  destruction  of a  relatively  small  group  of  neurons 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comMETHODOLOGY  FOR  DIRECT  COMMUNICATION  WITH  BRAIN  85 

Figure  3 
Chimpanzees  Paddy (left)  and Carlos, each with  100 intracerebral electrodes 
and  boxes  for  instrumentation.  In  spite  of  this  massive  implantation,  no 
detectable  behavioral  deficits  have  been  found,  and  the  animals  are  still 
alive  and  in  excellent  health  two  years  after  surgery. 

does  not  produce  any  detectable  deficit.  The  thin  reactive  en 
capsulation  is  electrically  conductive  and  is  not  an  obstacle 
to  stimulation  or  recording.  Beyond  this  0.1-0.2  millimeter 
capsule,  the  brain appears  histologically  normal.  Judged  by the 
absence  of abnormal  electrical  activity,  the  reliability  of effects 
evoked by ESB, and the consistency of thresholds of excitability 
through  months  of  experimentation,  the  electrodes  seem  to  be 
well  tolerated.  Some  of  our  monkeys  have  had  electrodes  in 
their  heads  for  more  than  four  years.  The  anchorage  is  very 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

86 
solid,  and after some  initial  pulling and scratching  of  the  ter 
minal sockets,  the monkeys seem to ignore their presence_ 

As  shown  in  Figure  3,  as  many  as  100  contacts  have  been 
implanted in the brain of some chimpanzees without any notice 
able  neurophysiological  or behavioral  disturbance,  and  in  sev 
eral monkeys, contacts  have been placed in areas as  critical and 
delicate  as  the  respiratory centers  of  the  medulla  without  any 
surgical problems. Electrodes have been used in laboratory ani 
mals  such as  rats,  cats,  and monkeys, and also  in less  frequently 
studied species including crickets, roosters, dolphins,  and brave 
bulls. 

Electrodes in the Human Brain 

Our present knowledge of the central nervous system is based 
principally on investigations  in animals.  Experience has  shown 
that  many  questions  about  implantation  in  humans,  such  as 
biological  tolerance  of  electrodes  by  the  neural  tissue,  can  be 
successfully  answered  in  cats  or  in  lower  species.  Some  of  the 
electrochemical  events  of  neural  conduction  can  be  analyzed 
just  as  adequately  in  squids  as  in  mammals,  and  for  certain 
studies of memory,  the octopus has proven an excellent subject. 
The rat has been-and still is-the animal preferred by experi 
mental psychologists because it is a small and inexpensive mam 
mal which can be used in large quantities to provide behavioral 
results suitable for statistical evaluation. The limited behavioral 
repertory of lower animals,  however,  cannot be compared with 
the complex activities of monkeys and apes. These species, being 
closer  relatives  of  man,  are  more  appropriate  subjects  for  the 
neurophysiological  study  of  intelligent  behavior,  and  when 
we  want  to  investigate  the  highest  psychological  functions  of 
the  brain  which  involve  verbal  communication,  there  is  no 
possible substitute for man himself. 

The human brain, like any other part of the body, may suffer 
traumatic accidents,  tumors,  or illnesses,  and  it has  often  been 
necessary to explore the affected areas in order to identify struc 
tures,  assess  abnormality  of  the  tissues,  test  excitability,  and 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comMETHODOLOGY  FOR  DIRECT  COM.MUNICATION  WITH  BRAIN  87 
learn  the location of important functions  which should  not be 
disrupted  during  surgical  procedures.  Conscious  participation 
of  the  patient was  required  in some  of  these  explorations,  for 
example, to ascertain whether the aura of epileptic attacks could 
be triggered by electrical stimulation of. a specific cortical point; 
thus providing information about the possible source of epileptic 
discharges  which  could be removed  by  surgery.  For  this  kind 
of  investigation  the  brain  was  exposed  under I~ anesthesia, 
presenting an exceptional opportunity  to  study · behavioral and 
psychological responses  evoked  by  ESB  ii;t  fully  awake subjects. 
The most  extensive  work  in this  area  has. been carried  out by 
Penfield and his associates in Montreal (174), and a considerable 
number of similar studies have been performed by other neuro 
surgeons as well  (2,  8,  97,  124,  163,  215). 

Exploration of the exposed brain has,  however, some obvious 
limitations. It has  to be brief to avoid prolongation of surgery; 
electrodes are usually held hi place by hand, causing variability 
in the applied mechanical pressure; . the exposed }>rain is subject 
to  possible  thermal,  mechanical,  and  chemical  trauma;  the 
cortical  areas  are  identified only  by visual  inspection;  and the 
physical  and  psychological  stress  of  the . patient  undergoing 
operation  introduces  factors  difficult  to  control.  Most  of  these 
handicaps can be avoided with the use of implanted electrodes, 
and  given  the  experience  of  animal  experimentation  it  was 
natural that some investigators should contemplate the applica 
tion  of  this  methodology  to  patients  for  diagnostic.· and thera 
peutic purposes  (19,  59,  g8).  Neurosurgeons had already proved 
that the central nervous system is  not as  delicate as  most people 
believe,  and  during  therapeutic  surgery  parts  of  the  cerebral 
tissue  have  been cut,  frozen,  cauterized,  or ablated  with  negli 
gible adverse effects on the patients. Exploratory introduction of 
needles into the cerebral ventricles is a well-known and relatively 
safe clinical procedure, and since electrodes are smaller in diam 
eter than these needles, their introduction into the brain should 
be even less traumatic. Experience has confirmed the safety and 
usefulness of long-term  implantation of electrodes in man, and 
the procedure has been used in specialized medical centers around 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com88 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

the world to help thousands of patients suffering from epilepsy, 
involuntary movements,  intractable pain,  anxiety neurosis, and 
other cerebral disturbances. In general several assemblies of fine 
electrodes with a  total of twenty to forty  contacts are placed on 
the surface andjor in the depth of the brain, with the terminal 
connectors  exteriorized  through  the  scalp  and  protected  by  a 
small head bandage (see  Figure 4).  In some  cases  the electrodes 
have remained for nearly two years with excellent tolerance. 

Leaving wires inside of a thinking brain may appear unpleasant 
or dangerous,  but actually  the  II}any  patients  who  have  under 
gone this experience have not been concerned about the fact  of 
being wired,  nor have  they felt any discomfort due  to  the  pres 
ence of conductors in their heads. Some women have shown their 
feminine  adaptability  to  circumstances  by  wearing  attractive 
hats  or  wigs  to  conceal  their  electrical  headgear,  and  many 
people  have  been  able  to  enjoy  a  normal  life  as  outpatients, 
returning to the clinic periodically for examination and stimula 
tion. In a few cases in which contacts were located in pleasurable 
areas, patients have had the opportunity to stimulate their own 
brains  by  pressing  the  button  of  a  portable  instrument,  and 
this  procedure  is  reported  to  have  therapeutic  benefits. 

Chronically  implanted  electrodes  enable  careful  diagnostic 
explorations to be performed without time limit,  and repeated 
electrical  excitations  or  well-controlled  coagulations  can  be 
graded  according  to  the  reactions  of  the  patient.  As  a  bonus, 
important  information  about  psychophysiological  correlations, 
providing direct knowledge  about  the  cerebral  basis  of human 
behavior,  is  being  acquired.  In  our  studies  (6o,  wg,  150),  an 
interview  situation  was  selected  as  the  method  most  likely  to 
offer a  continuous supply of verbal and behavioral  data.  While 
the electrical activity of eight pairs of cerebral  points was  being 
recorded,  we  taped  about  one  hour  of  conversation  between 
therapist  and  patient.  Notes  of  the  observable  behavior  were 
also  taken.  During the  interview,  electrical  stimulations  of  the 
brain were applied for 5 seconds with intervals of three or more 
minutes, and  each  significant point was  explored  several  times. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comMETHODOLOGY  FOR  DIRECT  COMMUNICATION  WITH  BRAIN  8g 

Figure  4 
Two  girls  who  were  suffering  from  epileptic  seizures  and  behavioral  dis 
turbances  requiring  implantation  of  electrodes  in  the  brain  for  diagnostic 
and  therapeutic  purposes.  Under  the  cap,  each  patient  wears  a  "stimo 
ceiver,"  used  to  stimulate  the  brain  by  radio  and  to  send  electrical  signals 
of brain  activity  by  telemetry  while  the  patients  are  completely free  within 
the  hospital  ward  (6o).  One  example  of  electrical  recordings  is  shown  in 
Figure  17. 

Two-way  Radio Communication with the Brain 

Electronic  technology  has  reached  a  high  level  of  sophistica 
tion,  and  two-way  radio  commJ'nication  with  automobiles,  air 
planes,  and  outer  space  vehicles  is  commonplace  today.  The 
notable  lag  in  development  of  similar  instrumentation  for 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comgo 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

Figure  5 
A  monkey  instrumented  with  28  implanted  electrodes,  a  two-channel  tele 
metric  unit  on  top  of  the  head,  and  a  three-channel  radio  stimulator 
around  the  neck.  The  animal  has  learned  to  press  a  lever  to  obtain  food. 
With  this methodology,  brain functions  can  be  explored  by  remote control 
without  disturbing  the  behavior  under  observation. 

communciation with  the depth  of  the  brain reflects  the already 
mentioned  unbalanced  evolution  of our  technological  civiliza 
tion,  which seems  more  interested  in accumulating  power  than 
in  understanding and  influencing  the  basic  mechanisms  of  the 
human mind. 

This gap is  now  being filled,  and as  Figures  4  and  5  show,  it 
is  already  possible  to  equip  animals  or  human  beings  with 
minute instruments called "stimoceivers" for radio transmission 
and  reception  of  electrical  messages  to  and  from  the  brain  in 
completely  unrestrained  subjects.  Microminiaturization  of  the 
instrument's electronic components permits control of all param-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comMETHODOLOGY  FOR  DIRECT  COMMUNICATION  WITH  BRAIN  91 

eters of excitation for radio stimulation of three different points 
within the brain and also telemetric recording of three channels 
of  intracerebral  electrical  activity.  In animals,  the  stimoceiver 
may be anchored to the skull, and different members of a colony 
can  be  studied  without  disturbing  their  spontaneous  relations 
within  a  group.  Behavior such as  aggression  can  be  evoked or 
inhibited.  In  patients,  the  stimoceiver  may  be  strapped  to  the 
head bandage, permitting electrical stimulation and monitoring 
of intracerebral  activity without  disturbing spontaneous  activi 
ties. 

Stimoceivers offer great promise in the investigation, diagnosis, 
and therapy of cerebral disturbances in man.  Preliminary infor 
mation about use  in patients with  temporal  lobe  seizurees  (see 
Figure 4)  has demonstrated the following advantages over other 
methods  of  intracerebral  exploration  (6o):  (1)  The  patient  is 
instrumented  simply  by  plugging  the  stimoceiver  to  the  head 
sockets.  (2)  There  is  no  disturbance  of  the  spontaneous  in 
dividual  or  social  behavior  of  the  patient.  (3)  The  subject  is 
under  continuous  medical  supervision,  and  stimulations  and 
recordings may  be made day  and night.  (4)  Studies are  carried 
out  during  spontaneous  social  interactions  in  the  hospital  en 
vironment without  introducing factors  of anxiety  or  stress.  (5) 
The brain in severely disturbed patients may be explored with 
out confinement  to  a  recording room.  (6)  As  connecting wires 
are not  necessary  there  is  no risk  of  dislodgment  of  electrodes 
during abnormal behavior. (7)  Therapeutic programed stimula 
tion of the brain can be prolonged for any nece~ry amount of 
time. 

It is reasonable to speculate that in the near future the stimo 
ceiver may  provide the essential link from  man to computer  to 
man,  with  a  reciprocal  feedback  between  neurons  and  instru 
ments  which  represents  a  new  orientation  for  the  medical 
control of neurophysiological functions.  For example,  it is  con· 
ceivable  that  the  localized  abnormal  electrical  activity  which 
announces the ·imminence of an epileptic attack could be picked 
up by implanted electrodes, telemetered to a distant instrument 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

92 
room,  tape-recorded,  and  analyzed  by  a  computer  capable  of 
recognizing  abnormal  electrical  patterns.  Identification  of  the 
specific  electrical  disturbance  could  trigger  the  emission  of 
radio signals  to activate  the  patient's stimoceiver  and apply  an 
electrical  stimulation  to  a  determined  inhibitory  area  of  the 
brain, thus blocking the onset of the convulsive episode. 

This  speculation  is  supported  by  the  following  experiments 
completed in June,  1g6g,  in  collaboration  with  Drs.  Johnston, 
Wallace, and Bradley. Chimpanzee Paddy (Figure 3),  while free 
in  her cage,  was  equipped  with  a  stimoceiver  to  telemeter  the 
brain  activity  of  her  right  and  left  amygdaloid  nuclei  to  an 
adjacent room, where  these waves were received,  tape-recorded, 
and  automatically  analyzed  by  an  on-line  analog  computer. 
This instrument  was  instructed  to  recognize  a  specific  pattern 
of  waves,  a  burst  of  spindles,  which  was  normally  present  in 
both  amygdaloid  nuclei  for  about  one  second  several  times 
per  minute.  The  computer  was  also  instructed  to  activate  a 
stimulator,  and  each  time  the  spindles  appeared,  radio  signals 
were  sent  back  to  Paddy's  brain  to  stimulate  a  point  in  her 
reticular  formation  known  to  have  negative  reinforcing  prop 
erties.  In  this  way  electrical  stimulation  of  one  cerebral  struc 
ture was contingent on the production of a specific EEG pattern 
by another area of the brain, and the whole process of identifica 
tion of information and command of action was  decided by the 
on-line computer. 

Results showed  that about  two  hours after  the  brain-to-com 
puter-to brain feedback was established, spindling activity of the 
amygdaloid  nucleus  was  reduced  to  50  per  cent;  and  six  days 
later,  with  daily  two-hour  periods  of  feedback,  spindles  were 
drastically  reduced  to  only  1  per  cent  of  normal  occurrence, 
and  the  chimpanzee . was  quieter,  less  attentive,  and  less  moti 
vated  during  behavioral  testing,  although  able  to  perform 
olfactory and visual  tasks  without errors. 

The  computer  was  then  disconnected,  and  two  weeks  later 
the  EEG  and  Paddy's  behavior  returned  to  normal.  The  ex 
periment  was  repeated  several  times  with  similar  results,  sup-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comMETHODOLOGY  FOR  DIRECT  COMMUNICATION  WITH  BRAIN  93 

porting  the  conclusions  that  direct  communication  can  be 
established between brain and computer, circumvening normal 
sensory  organs,  an~ also . that automatic learning  is  possible  by 
feeding signals directly into specific neuronal structures without 
conscious  participation. 

One of the limiting factors  in these studies was the existence 
of  wires  leading  from  the  brain  to  the  stimoceiver outside  of 
the  scalp. The wires  represented  a  possible  portal  of entry for 
infection and could be a hindrance to hair grooming in spite of 
their  small  size.  It  would  obviously  be ·far  more  desirable  to 
employ  minute  instruments  which  could  be  implanted  com 
pletely  beneath  the  skin.  For  this  purpose  we have  developed 
in  our  laboratory  a  small  three..channel  stimulator  which  can 
be  placed  subcutaneously  and which  has  terminal  leads  to  be 
implanted within the brain  (Figure 6). The instrument is  solid 
state, has no batteries, and can work indefinitely. Necessary elec 
trical  energy, remote control  of parameters of stimulation,  and 
choice of channels are provided by transdermal  coupling,  using 
a  small  coil  which  is  activated  by  frequency-modulated  radio 
signals.  In February,  1969, an experiment was begun in monkey 
Nona  and  in  chimpanzee  Suzi . who  were  equipped  with  sub 
cutaneous stimulators to activate their brains from time to time 
for  the  rest  of  their  lives.  Terminal  contacts  were  located  in 
motor pathways  in  order  to  evoke  flexion  ofthe contralateral 
leg, an effect simple enough to be observed and quantified with 
out difficulty. Study of Nona and Suzi and preliminary investiga 
tions  in  other  animals  have  demonstrated  that  subcutaneous 
instrumentation  is  efficient,  reliable,  and  well  tolerated.  Be 
havioral responses were consistent,  and local  motor excitability 
was not modified by repeated experimentation. Thus the techni 
cal  problems  of  stimulating any  desired  area  of  the  brain  for 
as long as necessary in the absence of conductors passing through 
the skin have been solved, therapeutic and scientific possibilities 
have been multiplied, and the comfort of subjects has been con 
siderably increased. 

The  next  technical  step  will  be  to  combine  transdermal 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comFigure  6 
Both  sides  of  a  three-channel  transdermal  stimulator.  This  instrument 
has  no  batteries,  is  activated  by  radio,  and  can  be  used  for  life,  so  that 
the  brain  can  be  stimulated  indefinitely.  Chimpanzee  Suzi  (right)  has 
two  units  (six  channels)  implanted  on  her  back  underneath  the  skin. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comMETHODOLOGY  FOR  DIRECf  COMMUNICATION  WITH  BRAIN  95 

stimulation  of  the  brain  with  transdermal  telemetry  of  EEG. 
In  this  case  the  stimoceiver  will  not  be  outside  the  skin  as  it 
was  in  Paddy  (Figure  3),  nor  will  it  be  limited  to  only  trans 
dermal  stimulation  (Figure  6)  as  in  Nona and Suzi:  the  whole 
instrument  will  be  totally  subcutaneous.  The  technology  for 
nonsensory  communication  between  brains  and  computers 
through  the  intact skin is  already at our fingertips,  and its con 
sequences  are  difficult  to  predict.  In  the  past  the  progress  of 
civilization has tremendously magnified the power of our senses, 
muscles,  and skills.  Now  we  are  adding  a  new  dimension:  the 
direct  interface  between  brains  and  machines.  Although  true, 
this statement is perhaps too spectacular and it requires cautious 
clarification.  Our  present  knowledge  regarding  the  coding  of 
information,  mechanisms  of  perception,  and  neuronal  bases  of 
behavior  is  so  elemental  that  it  is  highly  improbable  that 
electrical  correlates  of  thoughts  or  emotions  could  be  picked 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comg6 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

up,  transmitted,  and  electrically applied  to  the  suitable  struc 
ture  of  a  different  subject  in  order  to  be  recognized  and  to 
trigger related thoughts or emotions. It is, however, already pos 
sible  to induce a  large wu-iety  of responses,  from  motor  effects 
to emotional reactions and intellectual· manifestations, by direct 
electrical  stimulation  of  the  brain.  Also,· several  investigators 
have  learned  to identify patterns of electrical  activity  (which  a 
computer could also recognize) localized in specific  areas of the 
brain and related to determined phenomena such as perception 
of smells or visual perception of edges and movements.  We are 
advancing  rapidly  in  the pattern recognition  of electrical  cor 
relates  of  behavior and in the methodology for  two-way  radio 
communication between brain and computers. 

Fears  have  been  expressed  that  this  new  technology  brings 
with  it  the  threat of possible  unwanted  and  unethical  remote 
control  of  the cerebral activities  of man  by other men,  but  as 
will  be discussed  late.,t,  this  danger is quite  improbable  and  is 
outweighed  by  the.  expected  clinical  and . scientific  benefits. 
Electronic knowledge and microminiaturiZation have progressed 
so much that the limits appear biological rather than technologi 
cal.  Our  greatest need  is  for  more  experimental  information 
about  the  neuronal  mechanisms  related  to  behavioral  and 
mental processes, and research in unrestricted subjects promises 
to reveal new understanding of normal minds and more efficient 
therapy of disturbed brains. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com12 

Electrical  Stimulation  of the  Brain  (ESB) 

The master control for the whole body resides  in the brain, and 
the  new  methodology  of  implanted  electrodes  has  provided 
direct  access  to  the  centers  which  regulate  most  of  the  body's 
activities. The brain also constitutes the material substratum of 
mental functions, and by exploring its working neurons we have 
the  possibility  of  investigating  experimentally  some  of  the 
classical  problems  of  mind-brain  correlations.  In  addition  to 
new  answers,  implantation  of  electrodes  has  introduced  new 
problems:  Is  it feasible  to  induce  a  robotlike  performance  in 
animals  and  men  by  pushing  the  buttons  of  a  cerebral  radio 
stimulator? Could drives, desires, and thoughts be placed under 
the  artificial command of electronics? Can personality  be  influ 
enced by  ESB?  Can the mind be physically controlled? 

In scientific  literature  there  is  already  a substantial  amount 
of  information  demonstrating  the  remarkable  effects  induced 
by  ESB.  The  heart,  for  instance,  can  be  stopped  for  a  few 
beats,  slowed  down,  or  accelerated  by  suitable  stimulation 
of  determined  cortical  and  subcortical  structures,  illustrat 
ing the  physiological reality  that  it is  the  brain which  controls 
the  heart,  and  not  vice  versa.  Respiratory  rate  and  amplitude 
have been driven by ESB; gastric secretion and motility have also 
been modified  by  brain stimulation;  the diameter of the  pupil 
can be adjusted at will  (Figure  7)  from  maximum  constriction 
to  maximum  dilatation,  as  if  it  were  a  photographic  camera, 
simply by changing the intensity  knob of an electric stimulator 

97 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comFigure  7 
The  diameter  of  the  pupil  can  be  electrically  controlled  as  if  it  were  the 
diaphragm  of a  photographic  camera.  Above,  the  normal  eyes,  and  below, 
constriction  of the right  pupil  evoked by stimulation of the  hypothalamus. 
Some  effects  of  ESB  such  as  this  are  indefatigable  and  can  be  maintained 
for  days  as  long  as  stimulation  is  applied  (61). 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comELECTRICAL  SHMULATIO.N OF  T};[E  JmAIN 

99 

connected wit:ll  the hypothalalllic regio11 of$e brain .(61)..  Most 
visceral functions have been infh,tericed by  ESB, . as have sensoty 
perceptions,  motor  activities,  and .·.  m,en~i .. functions.  · Rather 
than examine each type of finding in q(!tail,  w_e  have selected a 
few  typical  exalllples  to illu~tr~te the m#n ~spettS> of electrical 
control of the brain and .it$  qehayioraLcons¢q~entes. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comMotor  Responses 

Behavior  is  the  result  of  motor  activities  which  range  from  a 
simple muscular twitch  to  the creation  of a  work  of art.  If we 
consider  the  Skill  involved  in  nest  building,  the  strategies  of 
fighting animals, or the precision of piano playing,  it is  obvious 
that  these  activities  are  not  solely  the  result  of  physical  and 
chemical  processes of muscular contraction but depend on con 
scious  direction-on  the  refined  complexity  of  their  cerebral 
command. 

Very little is  known about the automatic aspects of voluntary 
acts, how purpose is related to performance, or how contractions 
are organized in time and space. Present methodology, however, 
has  placed some  of these  questions  within  experimental  reach. 
The fact that ES:B  can induce simple movements was discovered 
in the nineteenth century, and today we know that the cerebral 
organization of motility is  located  mainly in  the  cortex  of  the 
parietal lobe. Stimulation of this area induces movements on the 
opposite side of the body, while its destruction results  in paral 
ysis.  These findings have been expressed  in attractive  diagrams 
showing the motor areas of the brain as an "homunculus" lying 
upside  down  in  the  parietal  cortex,  with  a  big  face  and  a  big 
thumb,  like  a  caricature  of a  little  man  in  charge  of  motility. 
This  image  was  partly  responsible  for  consideration  of  the 
cortex as .the supreme and intelligent organizer of behavior. 

However, further research demonstrated that motor responses 
obtained from  this cortex are rather crude and  that other areas 

100 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comMOTOR  RESPONSES 

101 

in the depth of the brain have a decisive role in the organization 
of  skilled  motility.  Modern  concepts  suggest  that  the  cortex 
should  not  be considered  the  highest  hierarchical  structure  of 
the motor system or even  the starting point of motor impulses, 
but rather a way station, one more link in the loops of sensory 
motor  correlations.  The multiplicity  and  complexity  of  motor 
representation  is  logical  when  we  consider  the  tremendous 
variety  of  behavioral  manifestations  which  constitute  the  only 
means  of  communication  between  the  individual  and  his  sur 
roundings.  This  relation  requires  a  motor  performance  with 
precise  temporal  and  spatial  coordination  among  many  func 
tional  units  and  the  processing  of  a  great  deal  of  information 
for  the adjustment and guidance Of  movements and for  instan 
taneous adaptation to changes in circumstances.  Because of the 
complexity  of  these  mechanisms,  it  has  been  assumed  that  the 
artificial ESB could never induce refined and purposeful motor 
performance. The surprising fact  is that,  depending on its loca 
tion, electrical stimulation of the brain is able to evoke not only 
simple responses  but also  complex and well-organized behavior 
which may be indistinguishable from spontaneous activity. 

Motor Activation in Animals 

A  classical  experiment for  medical  students  is  to  anesthetize 
a rabbit or other small mammal and to expose its brain in order 
to stimulate the motor cortex. In this way simple responses, such 
as  contraction or extension of the limbs,  may be demonstrated. 
These  responses  usually  involve  a  small  group  of muscles,  are 
stereotyped,  and lack  adaptability,  but in spite of these  limita 
tions students are generally impressed by seeing the movements 
of an animal placed under the command of a human being. The 
demonstration  is  far  more  elegant  if  the  experimental  animal 
is completely awake and equipped with electrodes implanted in 
the  brain.  Then  the  responses  appear  more  physiological,  and 
we  can  investigate  the  mutual  influence  of  spontaneous  and 
evoked motility. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comFigure  8 
Electrical stimulation of the right-side motor cortex  produced flexion  of the 
left  hind  limb  proportional  in  amplitude  to  the  electrical  intensity  used. 
Observe  the  animal's  harmonious  postural  adaptation  to  the  evoked  move 
ment  and  lack  of  emotional  disturbance.  During  these  experiments  cats 
were  alert  and  friendly  as  usual,  purring  and  seeking  to  be  petted. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comMOTOR  RESPONSES 

Electrical  stimulation  of  the  right-side  motor cortex  o£  a  cat 
may  produce  flexion  of the  left  hind  leg with an  amplitude  of 
movement  proportional  to  the  applied  intensity.  For  example, 
in  one  experiment  when  the  animal  was  standing on  all  fours, 
the intensity of  1.2  milliamperes evoked flexion of the leg barely 
off  the  ground.  At  1.5  milliamperes,  the  hind  leg  rose  about 4 
centimeters, and when 1.8 milliamperes were applied, leg flexion 
was  complete  (Figure  8).  The  evoked  movement  began  slowly, 
developed smoothly, reached its peak in about two seconds,  and 
lasted until the end of the stimulation. This motor performance 
could  be repeated  as  many  times  as  desired,  and  it was  accom 
panied  by  a  postural  adjustment  of  the  whole  body  which  in 
cluded lowering of  the  head,  raising  of  the  pelvis,  and  a  slight 
weight shift to the left in order to maintain equilibrium on only 
three  legs.  The  electrical  stimulation  did  not  produce  any 
emotional  disturbance,  and  the cat  was  as  alert  and  friendly  as 
usual,  rubbing its  head against  the experimenter,  seeking  to be 
petted, and purring. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com104 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

If, however,  we  tried to prevent the evoked effect by holding 
the  left  hind  leg  with  our  hands,  the  cat  stopped  purring, 
struggled  to  get free,  and shook  its  leg.  Apparently  the  evoked 
motility  was  not  unpleasant,  but  attempts  to  prevent  it  were 
disturbing for the animal, suggesting that stimulation produced 
not a  blind motor movement but also a  desire  to move, and the 
cat  cooperated  spontaneously  with  the  electrical  command, 
adjusting  its  posture  before  performing  the  leg  flexion.  It was 
evident that the animal was  not in a  hurry and took its time in 
preparing for  the induced movement.  Preliminary adjustments 
were  not seen  if the eat's  posture was  already adequate  for  the 
leg flexion.  In cases  of conflict between  the spontaneous  move 
ments of the animal and those elicited by the experimenter, the 
final  result depended on  the  relative  strength  of  the  opposing 
signals.  For example,  if the cat was  walking,  threshold stimula 
tions of  1.2  milliamperes for  slight leg flexion  were  ineffective. 
If the  cat  was  stimulated  while  jumping  off  a  table  to  reach 
food,  stronger  intensities  of  up  to  1.5  milliamperes,  which 
usually  evoked  a  clear  motor  response,  were  also  ineffective; 
physiological activity seemed to override the artificial excitation 
and  the  cat  landed  with  perfectly  coordinated  movements.  If 
the intensity was  increased to  2  milliamperes, stimulation effects 
were  prepotent  over  voluntary  activities;  leg  flexion  started 
during the jump, coordination was disrupted, and the cat landed 
badly. A similar experiment is described on page 186. 

In monkeys,  electrical stimulation of motor areas  has  evoked 
contralateral  movements similar  to  those  described for  the  cat. 
The  stimulated  animal  showed  no  signs  of  fear  or  hostility 
(Figure  g),  nor  did  he  interrupt  his  spontaneous  behavior, 
such  as  walking,  climbing,  or  eating.  Evoked  and  spontaneous 
movements  influenced  each  other,  and  the  final  response  was  a 
combination  of both. 

Simultaneous stimulation of two cerebral points with opposite 
effects  could  establish  a  dynamic  balance  without  any  visible 
effect.  For example, if excitation of one point produced turning 
of the head to the right'and another one produced turning to the 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comMOTOR  RESPONSES 

105 

Figure  9 
Stimulation  of  the  temporal  lobe  (rhinal  fissure)  induced  opening  of  the 
mouth  and  movement  of  the  arm  without  signs  of  fear  or  hostility  (49) · 

left,  the monkey did not move his head at all  when  both points 
were  stimulated.  This equilibrium could  be  maintained  at dif 
ferent intensity levels of simultaneous stimulation. 

Brain  stimulation  of  different  areas  has  elicited  most  of  the 
simple movements observed in spontaneous behavior, including 
frowning,  opening  and  closing  the  eyes,  opening,  closing,  and 
deviation  of  the  mouth,  movements  of  the  tongue,  chewing, 
contraction  of  the  face,  movements  of  the  ears,  turns,  twists, 
flexions,  !lnd extensions of  the  head  and  body,  and  movements 
of  the  arms,  legs,  and  fingers.  We  must  conclude  that  most  if 
not all of the possible simple movements can be evoked by elec 
trical stimulation of the brain. Abnormal responses, disorganized 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com106 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

movements,  loss of equilibrium  (as  shown  in  Figure  10),  and 
epileptiform  convulsions  have  a:lso  been  produced,  depending 
on the cerebral area and parameters of stimulation investigated. 
Turning  now  to  more  complex  responses,  we  must  realize 
that normal activities  in animals and man  involve  a  succession 
of different acts well coordinated in space and in time. Walking, 
for example, is a displacement ofthe body with alternate flexion 
and  extension  of  the  extremities  requiring  refined  control  of 
strength, amplitude, · and speed  for  the  contraction  of different 
groups  of muscles with  precise  timing and  mutual  correlation 
aimed toward a  common goal.  In addition,  postural adaptation 
and corrective  movements  of the  head and  body are  necessary. 
To induce walking in an animal by programed electrical stimula 
tion of individual muscles would be a formidable task requiring 
the wiring of perhaps  100 muscles,  the  use  of  a  complex  com 
puter, sophisticated timing mechanisms,  large numbers ofstim 
ulators withinstantaneously adjustable intensities, many sensors, 
and the help of a  team of scientists and technicians, in addition 
to a  cooperative animal  and  a  measure  of good  luck.  The sur 
prising fa:ct  is that electrical pulses applied directly to the brain 
activate  cerebral  structures  which  possess  the  necessary  func 
tional  complexity  to  induce  walking  with  apparently  normal 
characteristics. 

· 

In one of our experiments,  monkey  Kuru  was  sitting in  the 
colony  cage  picking  some  food  when  radio  stimulation  of  his 
thalamus, located in the center of the brain, began.  The animal 
slowly got up and started walking around  the cage  on all  fours 
at a speed of about 1  meter per second, without bumping against 
the walls or against other animals,  in a  normal  manner without 
any signs  of anxiety,  fear, or discomfort.  At  the  end of 5  to  10 
seconds of stimulation, the monkey calmly sat down and resumed 
picking  food.  As  soon  as  stimulation  was  reapplied,  Kuru  re 
sumed walking around the cage.  In some studies  this  effect was 
repeated as  often as  sixty times in one hour. 

The speed and pattern of a motor response vary  according to 
the cerebral structure stimulated. The effect most often observed 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comFigure  IO 
Progressive clockwise  rotation  of the body along  the  longitudinal axis  with 
complete  loss  of  equilibrium  produced  by  radio  stimulation  of  specific 
areas  of  the  brain  (in  this  case,  the  tectum). 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com108 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

in  cats  and  monkeys,  obtained  by  stimulation  of  limbic  struc 
tures and extrapyramidal pathways, is walking in circles. Usually 
the  response  begins  with  slow  head  turning,  followed  by  body 
turning,  getting  up,  and  walking  around  the  cage.  In  other 
studies,  during  stimulation  of  the  fimbria  of  the  fornix,  a 
monkey ran around the cage at a speed of 2.4 meters per second, 
showing  excellent  coordination  and  orientation,  avoiding  ob 
stacles or other animals in its path. In this experiment, as shown 
in Figure  II, one monkey in the colony learned to press a  lever 
in the cage which triggered radio stimulation of the test animal. 
Repetition  of  these  excitations  produced  conditioning  in  the 
stimulated monkey. 

Another type of complex motor response induced by ESB has 
been  described  as  sequential  behavier  (54)  in  which  different 
patterns  of  behavior  follow  each  other  in  a  precise  order,  as 
indicated  in the following  typical  example.  Monkey  Ludy  had 
one  contact  implanted  in  the  red  nucleus,  and  when  it  was 
stimulated  for  5  seconds,  the  following  effects  appeared  (see 
Figure  I2):  (I) immediate interruption of spontaneous activity; 
(2)  change  in facial  expression;  (3)  turning of  the  head  to  the 
right;  (4)  standing  on  two  feet;  (5)  circling  to  the  right;  (6) 
walking  on  two  feet  with  perfect  balance,  using  both  arms  to 
maintain  equilibrium  during  bipedestation;  (7)  climbing  a 
pole;  (8)  descending  to  the  floor;  (g)  uttering  a  growl;  (10) 
threatening  and  often  attacking  and  biting  a  subordinate 
monkey;  (II) changing aggressive  attitude and approaching the 
rest of the group in a  friendly  manner;  (12)  resuming peaceful 
spontaneous  behavior.  This  complex  sequence  of  events  took 
place  during ten  to fourteen  seconds  always  in  the  same  order 
but with considerable  flexibility  in the  details  of  performance. 
Ludy avoided  obstacles  in  her  path,  walked  with  excellent  co 
ordination, and used normal strategies in her fights.  The sequen 
tial response was so reliable that it persisted after 2o,ooo stimula 
tions repeated once every minute. Demonstrating the specificity 
of  evoked  effects,  Figure  13  shows  Ludy's  very  different  re 
sponse evoked by radio stimulation of another red nucleus point 
located three millimeters away. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comFigure  I I  
The  monkey  at  left  has  learned  to  press  the  lever  inside  the  cage  which 
triggers  radio  stimulation  of  another monkey  in  the  fimbria  of  the  fornix, 
inducing  fast  running  with  excellent  coordination.  After  repetition  of 
these  excitations,  conditioning  is  established  in  the  stimulated  animal  who 
shows  restlessness  and  stands  in  a  cage  corner  ready  to  start  the  running 
response  as  soon  as  another  monkey  approaches  the  lever. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comFigure  r2 
Stimulation  of  the  red  nucleus  in  monkey  Ludy  produced  a  response 
which  included  turning of  the  head,  walking on  two  feet,  turning  around, 
and  other  sequential  effects.  The  experiment  was  repeated  more  than 
20,000  times  with  reliable  performance  (54)· 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comhttp:/www.propheticexplorer.comFigure  I) 
Radio  stimulation  of  Ludy  in  another  red  nucleus  point  3  millimeters 
away  produces  only  the  simple  response  of  yawning.  If the  monkey  was 
sleeping,  brain  stimulation  was  less  effective. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comMOTOR  RESPONSES 

Many questions were aroused by these experiments. Why was 
Ludy walking on two feet?  Why the chain of behavioral events? 
Why was  she  aggressive  a  few  seconds  after  the end of stimula 
tion?  More  studies  are  needed  in  order  to  understand  these 
problems,  but the fact  that similar sequences have been evoked 
in  other  monkeys  indicates  that  we  are  dealing  with  rather 
specific mechanisms of intracerebral organization. 

When reviewing the motor responses  that can be induced by 
electrical  stimulation  several  important  limitations  should  be 
considered: ( 1) Lack of predictability: When a point of the brain 
is  stimulated  for  the  first  time,  we  cannot  predict  the  effects 
which may be evoked. When the upper part of the motor cortex 
is  stimulated,  it is  highly  probable  that  the  contralateral  hind 
limb  will  contract,  but  we  cannot  foresee  the  quality  of  this 
movement or the participation of other body muscles,  or know 
whether this response  will affect  the whole leg or only the foot. 
Once  the  evoked  effect  is  known,  repeated  stimulations  give 
predictable  results  provided  that  the  experimental  situation  is 
constant. (2) Lack of purpose:  In some cases the evoked response 
is directed by the animal in a purposeful way, but the movements 
and sequential responses are usually out of context, and there is 
no reason  or  purpose  for  yawning,  flexing  a  hand,  or  walking 
around,  apart  from  ESB.  It is  important  to  differentiate  these 
aimless motor responses from  other types  of behavior described 
later in which  the aim is  of primary importance and the motor 
performance secondary.  (3)  No  robot performance:  Brain stim 
ulation  activates  cerebral  mechanisms  which  are  organized  for 
motor  performance,  but  it  cannot  replace  them.  With  the 
present state of the art,  it is  very unlikely that we could electri 
cally direct an animal to carry out predetermined activities such 
as  opening a  gate or performing an  instrumental  response.  We 
can  induce  pleasure  or  punishment  and  therefore  the  motiva 
tion  to  press  a  lever,  but  we  cannot  control  the  sequence  of 
movements necessary  for  this act in  the absence of the animal's 
own desire to do so. As will be discussed later, we can evoke emo 
tional  states  which  may  motivate  an  animal  to  attack  another 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com114 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

or to  escape,  but we  cannot electrically synthetize  the  complex 
motor performance of these acts. 

Motor Effects in Man 

The most  common  effect  obtained  by  electrical  stimulation 
of  the  human  brain  is  a  simple  motor  response  such  as  the 
contraction of an extremity. Tpis effect is often accompanied by 
lack of voluntary control of the muscles involved, and occasionally 
it  is  limited  to  a  local paralysis  without  any · other  observable 
symptoms. In general, the evoked contractions are simple in per 
formance,  artificial  in character,  lacking  purpose,  and  without 
the elegance of spontaneous motility. For example, in one of our 
patients, stimulation of the left parietal cortex through implanted 
electrodes evoked a  flexion  of the right hand starting with con 
traction of the  first two  fingers  and continuing with  flexion  of 
the  other fingers.  The closed  fist  was  then  maintained  for  the 
rest of the 5-second stimulation.  This effect  was  not unpleasant 
or disturbing,  and  it  developed  without  interrupting ongoing 
behavior  or  spontaneous  conversation.  The  patient  was  aware 
that his hand had moved involuntarily but he was not afraid and 
only under questioning did he comment that his arm felt "weak 
and  dizzy."  When  the  patient  was  warned  of  the  oncoming 
stimulation and was asked to try to keep his fingers extended, he 
could  not  prevent the  evoked · movement  and  commented,  "I 
guess,  Doctor,  that your electricity is stronger than my will."  If 
this  stimulation was  applied while  the  subject  was  voluntarily 
using his hand, for instance to turn the pages of a magazine, this 
action  was  not blocked but the  induced  hand flexion  distorted 
voluntary performance and resulted  in  crumpling and  tearing 
of pages.  In our experience and in reports by other investigators, 
electrical  stimulation  of  the  motor  cortex  has  not  induced 
precise  or  skillful  movements,  and  in  all  cases  the  evoked  re 
sponses have been clumsy and abnorinal. 

Excitation of the supplementary motor area,  located near the 
main motor cortex,  may induce  three  types  of effects  (174):  (1) 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comMOTOR  RESPONSES 

There can  be  postural  changes,  in  which  the  movement  starts 
slowly  and  attains  a  determined  end  point  with  more  or  less 
general involvement of the body.  (2)  The movements can have 
a  phasic character such as  pawing with the hand, stepping with 
the foot,  or flexing  and extending the  fingers  or wrist.  (3)  The 
response can consist of uncoordinated movements. Of special in 
terest is the possibility of activating paralyzed limbs by means of 
ESB. For example, one patient was suffering from sudden paraly 
sis  of the left arm and leg probably caused by an embolus, and 
after four years he had begun to experience burning pain in the 
left side of his body which was exacerbated by touching his left 
thorax or arm. After other treatments failed,  two surgical  inter 
ventions  were  performed  to  ablate  parts  of  the  sensorimotor 
cortex,  and  it  was  observed  that  electrical  stimulation  in  the 
supplementary  motor  area  produced  vocalization,  raising  of 
the  paralyzed  arm,  and  other  motor  responses.  These  effects 
were similar to those evoked in other patients without paralysis. 
Thus it is  clear that the supplementary cortex has  pathways  in 
dependent  from  the  classical motor  pathways  and  that  evoked 
movements may be independent from the integrity of the main 
motor representation in the cortex. 

ESB  apparently  produces  similar  results  whether  applied  to 
the motor area of a child or an adult, of a  manual laborer or of 
an  accomplished  artist.  Skills  and  refined  movements  do  not 
seem  to  be represented in the cortex,  or at  least they have  not 
been  aroused  by  its  electrical  stimulation.  The  motor  cortex 
is  probably  like a  large  keyboard  located  on  the  efferent  side, 
dealing  with  the  output of activity,  able  to  play the  strings  of 
muscular contraction and to produce movements, but requiring 
the direction of other cerebral structures which as  yet are little 
known. 

In  contrast  to  these  effects,  ESB  may  evoke  more  elaborate 
responses.  For example, in one of our patients,  electrical stimu 
lation of the rostral part of the internal capsule  produced head 
turning and slow  displacement of the  body  to  either side  with 
a well-oriented and apparently normal sequence, as if the patient 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comll6 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

were  looking for  something.  This stimulation was  repeated  six 
times on two different days  with comparable results.  The inter 
esting fact  was  that  the  patient  considered  the  evoked  activity 
spontaneous and always offered a  reasonable explanation for it. 
When  asked  "What are  you  doing?"  the  answers  were,  "I  am 
looking for my slippers," "I heard a  noise,"  "I am restless,"  and 
"I was  looking  under  the  bed."  In  this  case  it  was  difficult  to 
ascertain  whether  the  stimulation  had  evoked  a  movement 
which the patient tried to justify, or if an hallucination had been 
elicited which subsequently induced the patient to move and to 
explore the surroundings. 

There  are  very  few  clinical  reports  of  complex  movements 
evoked by ESB which are comparable to the sequential responses 
observed in monkeys, and this may indicate that cerebral organ 
ization  is  less  stereotyped  in  man  than  in  animals.  Temporal 
lobe  stimulation  in  man  has  induced  automatisms,  including 
fumbling with surgical drapes or with  the  patient's own hands, 
and well-organized movements aimed at getting off the operating 
table.  Usually these evoked automatisms have not been remem 
bered.  Vocalizations  and  more  or  less  intelligible  speech  may 
also be included among complex motor responses, although they 
represent  the  activation  of  motor  and  ideational  mechanisms. 
Vocalizations  have  been  obtained  by  stimulation  of  the  motor 
area  in  the  precentral  gyrus  and  also  of  the  supplementary 
motor area  in both hemispheres.  The response  usually  consists 
of  a  sustained  or  interrupted  cry  with  a  vowel  sound  which 
occasionally  has a  consonant component  ( 174). 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comHell and Heaven Within  the Brain: 

The  Systems  for  Punishment  and Reward 

When man evolved above other powerful  animals,  the size  and 
complexity  of  his  brain increased,  giving  him  superior  intelli 
gence  along  with  more  anguish,  deeper  sorrow,  and  greater 
sensitivity  than  any  other  living creature.  Man  also  learned  to 
enjoy  beauty,  to  dream  and  to  create,  to  love  and  to  hate.  In 
the education  of children as  well  as  in the  training of animals, 
punishment  and  reward  constitute  the  most  powerful  motiva 
tions  for  learning.  In  our  hedonistic  orientation  of  life  to 
minimize  pain  and  seek  pleasure,  we  often  attribute  these 
qualities  to  the  environment  without  realizing  that  sensations 
depend on a chain of events  which culminates in the activation 
of  determined  intracerebral  mechanisms.  Physical  damage,  the 
loss  of a  beloved child, or apocalyptic  disaster  cannot  make  us 
suffer  if some  of  our cerebral  structures  have  been  blocked  by 
anesthesia.  Pleasure  is  not  in  the  skin  being  caressed  or  in  a 
full  stomach,  but somewhere  inside  the  cranial  vault. 

At  the same  time  pain and  pleasure  have  important  psychic 
and  cultural  components  related  to  individual  history.  Men 
inhibited  by some  extraordinary  tribal  or religious  training  to 
endure  discomfort  have  been  tortured  to  death  without  show 
ing signs  of suffering.  It is  also  known  that  in  the  absence  of 
physical injury, mental elaboration of information may produce 
the worst kind of suffering.  Social  rejection,  guilt feelings,  and 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com118 

PHYSICAL ·CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

other  personal · r;r3.gedles  \·may  produce  greater  autonomic, 
somatic,  and . psychologi.¢;ll . manifestations  than  actual physical 
pain. 

. , 

There  is  strong reluctance  to accept that  such  penonal  and 
refined  interpretations of re<ility  as- being afraid  and  being  in 
love  are contingent .ort the  ~elnbrane (lepolarization  of deter 
mined clusters of neurons,  bt]t this  is  one aspect  of emotional 
phenomena  wliich:sh,(nild 'riot be ignored.  After  frontal  lobot 
omy,  cancer  patients  bav~:  r~ported  that  the  pain  persisted 
undiminished, . but th.at ·thetr"- subjective . suffering was  radically 
reduced, and they did not complain or request as  much medica 
tion as  before sl,itgery;l..obofumized -patients reacted ·to noxious 
stimuli  as  much; · if  riot'. more,. ·than  before  their  operations, 
jumping at . pinpriril_{s·arid  tes}>onding quickly  to objective  tests 
of excessive· heat; but they  showed decrea~d concern.  It seems 
that in the ftontallobe~ there Is  a  potentiating mechanism for 
the  evaluation 'Of. }>ers6ncd' .:sti:fferirig,  and  after  lobotomy  the 
initial sensatiOll of painis.U)im~ified, while ·the teactive COrilJ» 
nent  to  that . f~el~ng: is -~tl.y diminished;  This  mechanism  is 
rather specific  ofdle fronial3obes;  bilateral destrUction of. the 
temporallbbes'fhllS to tn<>diffpersonal suffering. 

· 

Imporran:tque5tions  to  resolve  are~ ·no some  cerebrhl  struc 
tures; have  l:he:·  s~Cilit r6Ie  of:Ulalyzing  determined  types  of 
sensations?  Is the  coding  ()f  :iriforination  at  the  receptor  level 
esSential forthe activatiori .ofthe5estructures? Not too long ago, 
many  scientists  -would  hav~ · dismissed  as · naive  the  already 
demonstratedfact ·that punishment and reward can be induced 
at will  by manipulating the ·cmttrols of an electrical  instrument 
connected to the brain; 

Perception  of . Sf!,fjering 

In textbooks alld scientific papers,  terms such as  "pain recep 
tors,"  "pain fibers,"  and ''pa'in  pathways"  are  frequently  used, 
but  it should  be Clarified  that  peripheral  nerves do  not  carry 
sensations. ·Neuronal  pathways  transmit  only  patterns  of  elec-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comHELL  AND  HEAVEN  WITHIN  THE  BRAIN 

1 19 

trical  activity  with  a  message  that  must  be  deciphered  by  the 
central nervous system,  and in  the absence of brain  there  is  no 
pain,  even  if some  reflex  motor  reactions  may  still  be  present. 
A  decapitated  frog  cannot feel  but will  jump away  with  fairly 
good motor coordination when pinched in the hind legs. During 
competitive sports or on the battlefield, emotion and stress  may 
temporarily block the feeling of pain in man, and often injuries 
are  not  immediately  noticed.  The  cerebral  interpretation  of 
sensory signals is  so decisive that the same stimulus may be con 
sidered  pleasant  or  unpleasant  depending on  circumstances.  A 
strong electrical  shock  on  the  feet  scares  a  dog and  inhibits  its 
secretion  of saliva.  If,  however,  the  same  "painful"  excitation 
is  followed  for  several  days  by  administration  of  food,  the 
animal accepts the shock, wagging its tail happily and salivating 
in anticipation of the food reward. Some of these dogs have been 
trained  to  press  a  lever  to  trigger  the  electric  shock  which  pre 
ceded  food.  During  sexual  relations  in  man,  bites,  scratches, 
and  other  potentially  painful  sensations  are  often  interpreted 
as enjoyable, and some sexual deviates seek physical punishment 
as  a  source of pleasure. 

The  paradox  is  that  while  skin  and  viscera  have  plentiful 
nerve endings  for  sensory  reception,  the  brain does  not  possess 
this type of innervation.  In patients  under local anesthesia,  the 
cerebral  tissue  may  be  cut,  burned,  pulled  apart,  or  frozen 
without  causing  any  discomfort.  This  organ  so  insensitive  to 
its own destruction is,  however, the exquisite sensor of informa 
tion  received  from  the  periphery.  In  higher  animal  species 
there is  sensory differentiation  involving specialized  peripheral 
receptors  which  code  external  information  into  electrical 
impulses  and  internal  analyzers  which  decode  the  circulating 
inputs in order to give rise to the perception of sensations. 

Most sensory messages travel through peripheral nerves, dorsal 
roots,  spinal  cord,  and  medulla  to  the  thalamic  nuclei  in  the 
brain, but from there we lose their trail and do not know where 
the information is interpreted as painful or pleasurable, or how 
affective  components  are  attributed  to  a  sensation  (212,  220). 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com120 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

Although  anatomical  investigations  indicate  that  thalamic 
fibers  project  to  the  parietal  "sensory"  cortex,  stimulation  of 
this area does not produce pain· in animals or man.  No discom 
fort has been reported following electrical excitation of the sur 
face  or depth of the· motor areas,  frontal  lobes,  occipital  lobes, 
cingulate  gyrus,  and many  other  structures,  while  pain,  rage, 
and  fear  have  been  evoked. by  excitation  of  the  central gray 
tegmentum,  and a  few  other regions. 

Animals  share  with . man  the  expressive  aspect  of  emotional 
manifestations. When a dog wags its tail, we suppose it is happy, 
and when a  cat hisses and spits we assume that it is  enraged, but 
these interpretations are anthropomorphic. and in reality we do 
not know the feelings of any animal. Several authors have tried 
to  correlate  objective  manifestations  with  sensations;  for  ex 
ample, stimulation of the cornea of the eye provokes struggling, 
pupillary dilatation, and rise ofblood pressure(87), but these re 
sponses are not necessarily related to awareness of feelings,  as  is 
dearly demonstrated by the defensive agility of the decapitated 
frog.  Experimental investigation of the mechanisms of pain and 
pleasure is handicapped in animals by their lack of verbal com 
munication,  but  fortunately  we  can  investigate  whether  an 
· animal  likes  or dislikes  the  perceived  sensations  by  analyzing 
its instrumental responses. Rats, monkeys, and other species can 
learn to press a lever in order to receive a reward such as  a food 
pellet  or  to  avoid. something  unpleasant  such  as  an  electric 
shock to the skin. By the voluntary act of instrumental manipula 
tion,  an  animal  expresses  whether  or  not  the  food,  shock,  or 
brain stimulation is desirable, allowing for  the objective  quali 
fication  of  the  sensation.  In  this way,  many cerebral  structures 
have  been  explored  to identify  their positive  or  negative  rein 
forcing properties. 

At  present  it is  generally  accepted  that  specific  areas  of  the 
brain participate in the  integration of pain sensations,  but  the 
mechanism  is  far  from  clear,  and  in  our  animal  experiments 
we do not know if we are stimulating pathways or higher centers 
of  integration.  The  concept  of  a  straight  conduction  of  pain 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comHELL  AND  HEAVEN  WITHIN  THE  BRAIN 

12 1 

messages  from  the  periphery  up  to  the  central  nervous  system 
was  too  elemental.  Incoming  messages  are  probably  processed 
at many levels  with feedbacks  which modify  the sensitivity  and 
the filtering of information at many stages including the periph 
eral receptor level.  Brain excitation, therefore,  may affect  trans 
mission as  well  as  the elaboration of inputs and feedback  mod 
ulation.  Electrical  stimuli  do  not  carry  any  specific  message 
because they are a  monotonous repetition of similar pulses, and 
the  fact  that  they  constitute  a  suitable  trigger  for  central  per 
ception of pain means  that the reception of a  patterned code  is 
not  required,  but  only  the  nonspecific  activation  of  neuronal 
pools  which  are  accessible  to  investigation.  In  addition  to  the 
importance  of  these  studies  for  finding  better  therapies  for 
the  alleviation of pain,  there  is  another aspect  which  has  great 
social  interest:  the  possible  relations  between  pain  perception 
and  violence. 

Violence  Within  the  Brain 

The chronicle of human civilization is  the story of a  coopera 
tive  venture  consistently  marred  by  self-destruction,  and  every 
advance has been accompanied by increased efficiency of violent 
behavior.  Early man needed considerable  physical strength  and 
skill to defend himself or attack other men or beasts with stones, 
arrows,  or  swords,  but  the  invention  of  explosives  and  subse 
quent development of firearms  have made unskilled individuals 
more powerful than mythical warriors of the past.  The technol 
ogy for destruction has now placed at the disposal of man a  vast 
arsenal  of  ingenious  weapons  which  facilitate  all  forms  of  vio 
lence  including  crimes  against  property,  assassinations,  riots, 
and  wars,  threatening  not  only  individual  life  and  national 
stability but the very existence of civilization. 

Ours  is  a  tragically  imbalanced  industrial  society  which 
devotes  most  of  its  resources  to  the  acquisition  of  destructive 
power and invests  insignificant effort in the search which could 
provide  the  true  weapons  of  self-defense:  knowledge  of  the 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com122 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

mechanisms  responsible  for  violent  behavior.  They  are  neces 
sarily related with  intracerebral  processes  of neuronal  activity, 
even  if  the  triggering  causality  may  reside  in  environmental 
circumstances.  Violence  is  a  product  of  cultural  environment 
and  is  an  extreme  forni  of aggression,  distinct  from  modes  of 
self-expression  required  for  survival  and  development  under 
normal  conditions.  Man  may  react  to  unpleasant  or  painful 
stimuli  with  violence-he  may  retaliate  even  more  vigorously 
than  he  is  attacked-but  only  if  he  has  been  taught  by  his 
culture  to  react  in  this  manner.  A  major role  of  education  is 
to  "build  internal  controls  in  human  beings  so  that  they  can 
withstand  external  pressures  and  maintain  internal  equilib 
rium"  (157).  We  should  remember  that  it  is  normal  for  an 
animal  to  urinate  when  the  bladder  is  full  and  to  mount any 
available  female  during  the  mating  season,  but  that  these  be 
haviors  may  be  controlled  in  man  through  training.  The  dis· 
tinctly human quality of cerebralization of behavior is  possible 
through  education. 

Human  aggression may  be considered  a  behavioral  response 
characterized  by  the  exercise  of force  with  the  intent  to  inflict 
damage  on  persons  or  objects.  The  phenomenon  may  be 
analyzed  in three components:  inputs,  determined  by  environ 
mental  circumstances  perceived  through  sensory  receptors  and 
acting upon the individual; throughputs, which are the personal 
processing  of  these  circumstances  through  the  intracerebral 
mechanisms  established  by  genetic  endowment  and  previous 
experiences;  and  outputs,  represented  by  the  expressions  of 
individual and social  behavior which constitute  the  observable 
manifestations  of  aggression.  Increasing  awareness  of  the  need 
to investigate these subjects has  already resulted in  the creation 
of  specialized  institutes,  but  surprisingly  enough  the  most 
essential  element  in  the  whole  process  of  violence  is  usually 
neglected. Attention is directed to economic,  ideological,  social, 
and  political  factors  and  to  their  consequences,  which  are  ex 
pressed as  individual and mass behavior, while the essential link 
in the central nervous system  is  often forgotten.  It is,  however. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comHELL  AND.HEAVEN.WI"pliNTHEBAAJN 

123 

an incontrovertible  fact thaft1te envirt>nQ;)ept ~s only the  pro 
vider of sensory inputs• whidrmust • brtillterprtted.·by the brain, 
and  that any  kind  of bel.la,vior  ~ the  .result 9f intt:a,cerebral 

. 

i 

.. 

· 

• ···-. 

.•••••.•.  •··.•.. 

activity. 

·•  .  . •  •.. ••.•..  . ••. · 

_  .· 
It would  be  naive  to investig:lte  the  reasons  for a  riot  by 
recordhtg the•intracerebraldectricalac.tivityo.f t:J:re  ~ticipants, 
but. it would be. equally wrong to igttor-e  t:J:re  fa,Ct  t:J:rat  ea(;ll par· 
ticipa,nt  has  a  brain .a~d tha~ detceFI1lined  neuronal groups  are 
reacting.••to sensory  it1puts, a~~l"e •. subseql.len.tly p:ro.ducing the 
behavioral expressio11 ()fviol~nce-•lloth nell~!)~hysiol()gical and 
environmental factors  wnst. he  evalU(lt~, aJ!d  ~y ,tneth00. 
ology is available  for their corn9in~ stuqy.  IIIl~<lni1Y' behaves 
in general no·moreintelligeiJ,tly~~.aJ.lillla.}s~Quldl.lnder the 
same circumstances.•·•·anp.thisa.la.rm.iilg.r~lity ~due Jargely  to 
''that· spiritual pride.which preven~ lll~ ft-~:teegar<f~ng·them­
selves and their behavior as par~ of nature <UJc1.  as  subject to its 
universal laws" ( 148). Experitnft!ltaliuvesti~ti9J.1. ofthe cerebral 
structures  responsible • • for ·-aggr~ivf;  beba,\'ifl{  is ····an  e!)sential 
coun.tewart of social  sw~~s, aUtl th.is,  sh0~.dd ·'be re<;Qgnized by 
sociologists a~ well as l)iplogist_,s· .•. ··...  . .· .. ••• ......... _ ... ••• •·· .· ...•.  ,· 

In •a,nimals,  the  first,  deJJ1QI}l~t~ofl .. ~t pff~!lsive  a~tivity 
could he evoked by ~B ~s pro:Vi(led ~Y :f!ess(los)~. <1nd  it has 
subsequef1t1Y  been  confinn.ed.  bypuJiler~~~ ~v~~gators. Cats 
under.ele,ctrical. stilnulatio~ (}f tlJ-~  pet'iY~~E;l11<lr ~y, matter 
acted·-''as if .. threatentl(f·l>y ... a,~bg.~.~ •• ·res~H?~n~~t!l·unsheathed 
claws atuiwell-aimed •. blo~s.'""f'!le~niui~.~pj~, snf,)rt!l or· growls. 
At· the •same  time tile }iair()!l~ .. ~~-s~J.l~~9tl ~nd, and its tail 
becomes bushy.  Its pup~'~idep,.~()~¢UJil~ toif1l.eit  IDaximum, 
and its ears lie back or ~y~ ba,<:k;al)~ fort}l  to f:righ.ten the non 
existing .• enemy''•(to6) .•.. ·JU,tib¢se · ~xperi1Jlenl$.••itisimportant to 
know bow . the .cat really feels· Is it awar~ of its ol\Til  responses? 
Is the hostility purposefQl!yor~eptf:ciJ() do~? ()r is the ~tntire 
phenomenon .. a  pseudoaffeetive . reaqtion,  a  false  or sham  rage 
containing  the motor comp<)J1ents, of offensiv_e  display  without 
actual emotional participation? These ~ues have.oeen,debated 
over the years, but tOday it is dear that both spam and true rage 

.· .. ·.·  .. . 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comhttp:/www.propheticexplorer.comHELL  AND  HEAVEN  WITHIN  THE  BRAIN 

I 2 5 

Figure  I4 
At upper left,  the  control,  two  friendly  cats.  At  lower  left,  electrical stimu 
lation  of  the  anterior  hypothalamus  evoked  an  aggressive  expression  not 
directed  against  the  other  cat  which,  however,  reacts  with  a  defensive 
attitude. Above,  the normal cat attacks  the stimulated  animal which  lowers 
its  head,  flattens  its  ears,  and  does  not  retaliate.  This  experiment  is  an 
example  of  false  rage  (53)· 

can be elicited by ESB depending on the location of stimulation. 
Excitation of the anterior hypothalamus may induce a  threaten 
ing  display  with  hissing  and  growling  which  should  be  inter 
preted as  false  rage  because,  as  shown  in  Figure  14,  the display 
was not directed against other animals.  When other cats reacted 
by  hissing  and  attacking  the  stimulated  animal,  it  did  not 
retaliate or escape and simply lowered its head and flattened  its 
ears,  and  these  brain  stimulations  could  not  be  conditioned  to 
sensory cues. 

In contrast,  true rage has  been demonstrated in other experi 
ments. As shown in Figure 15, stimulation of the lateral hypothal 
amus  produced  an  aggressive  display  clearly  directed  toward 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comFigure  IJ 
Electrical  stimulation  of the  lateral  hypothalamus  evoked  true  rage  which 
is  characterized  by  aggressive  display  oriented  toward  another  cat  (above); 
attack  with  well-oriented  claws  directed  against  other  cats  (below); 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comattack  against  investigators  with  whom  relations  had  previously  been 
friendly  (above);  learning  of  instrumental  responses,  such  as  rotating 
a  paddle  wheel,  in  order  to  stop  the  brain  stimulation  (below).  In  this 
way the cat expresses its d~like of being stimulated in a  particular area (5!1) · 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

a  control  animal which reacted  properly  in  facing  the  threat. 
The  stimulated  animal  started. prowling  around  looking· for 
fights  with  other  subordinate  aninJals,  but avoided  the  most 
powerful cat in the group. It was evident that brain stimulation 
had  created a  state • of increased aggyessiveness,  but it  was  also 
clear  that  the  cat  directed its  hostility  intelligently,  choosing 
the  enemy  and  the.  IIJ.Oment  of attack,  changing  tactics,  and 
adapting its movements  to· the motor reaction of its  opponent. 
Brain  stimulation  detetmined .. the  affective  state  of  hostility, 
but  behavioral performance depended on the  individual  char 
acteristics  of  the  stimulated  ai1iinal,  including  learned  skills 
and previous  experiences.  Stimulations  were  usually  tested  for 
5  to  1 o  seconds,  but since it:  was  important  to know  the  fatig 
ability of the effect, a  longer experiment was  performed, reduc 
ing the  applied intensity  to a  level  which did not  evoke  overt 
rage.  The  experimental  subject  was  an  affectionate  cat  which 
usually  sought  petting  and  purred  while  it  was  held  in  the 
experimenter's  arms.  Then  it  was  introduced  into  the  colony 
with  five  other cats and was  radio stimulated  continuously  for 
two  hours.  During  this  period  the  animal  sat  motionless  in  a 
corner of the cage,  uttering barely audible growls  from  time  to 
time. If any other cat approached, the stimulated animal started 
hissing  and  threatening,  and  if  the  experimenter  tried  to  pet 
it,  the growls  increased in  intensity  and  the  animal  often  spat 
and  hissed.  This  hostile  attitude  disappeared  as  soon  as  the 
stimulation was  over,  and the cat became as  friendly  as  before. 
These  experiments  demonstrated- that  brain  excitation  could 
modify  reactions  toward  normal  sensory  stimuli  and  could 
modulate  the  quality of the responses  in a  way  similar to mod 
ulation during spontaneous emotional  states. 

Monkeys are more interesting subjects than cats for  the study 
of social interactions because of their more numerous and skill 
ful spontaneous activities. It iswell known that monkey colonies 
constitute  autocratic  societies  in  which  one  animal  establishes 
itself  as  boss  of  the  group,  claiming  a  large  portion  of  the 
territory,  feeding  first,  and  being  avoided  by  the  others,  who 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comHELL  AND  HEAVEN  WITHIN  THE  BRAIN 

129 

usually  express  their -submissiveness  by  grimacing,  crouching, 
and offering  sexual  play.  In several  colonies . we  have . observed 
that  radio  stimulation  of specific  points  in  the  thalamus  or 
central  gray  in  the  boss  monkey  increased  his  aggressiveness 
and induced well-directed attacks against other members of  the 
group, whom he chased around a~d oc~asionally bit, as shown in 
Figure  16  (56).  It  was  evident thathis  hostility  was  oriented 
purposefully and according  to  his  previous  experience  because 
he usually attacked the other male who represented a  challenge 
to his authority, and he always spared the little female who was 
his  favorite  partner. 

· 

A high-ranking monkey expreSs~S rage by auacking submissive 
members of the colony, but what would be the consequences of 
stimulating  the  brain  of  lower-rankipg  ani:rnals?  Could  they 
be induced to challenge the authotityofothetmonkeys, includ 
ing perhaps even the boss, or would their social inhibitions block 
the  electrically  induced  hostility?  These  questions  were  inves 
tigated  in  one  colony by  changing its  composition  to  increase 
progressively  the  social  rank  of  one  member, a  female  named 
Lina,  who  in the  first  grouping of four  anim<lls  ranked  lowest, 
progresSing  to  third  rank in  the second  group  and  to second 
rank in the third group. Social dominance was evaluated during 
extended control  periods using the criteria of number of spon 
taneous  agonistic  and  sexual  interactions,  priority  in  food 
getting,  and  territoriality. ·on two  suCfessive. mornings in each 
colony Lina was radio stimulateq for 5 seconds <mce a minute for 
one hour in the nucleus posterolate'ralis of ihe thalamus.  In all 
three colonies, these stimulati(j_ns induc~d Linato l'Un across the 
cage,  climb  to  the ceiling,  lick,  vocalize,  an(}  according  to  her 
social status, to attack other animals. fugroupt·,whereLina was 
submissive,  she  tried  toat~ck · another moJ}k~yonlyonce, and 
she was  threatened .or attacked24 tim."es,Jn group 2 she became 
more aggres~ive (24  occurrences) ancl"\Vas attacked only 3  times, 
while i11 group 3 Lina attacked other monkeys 79 times and was 
not  threatened  at  all.  No changes in the  number  of  agonistic 
acts were observed in any group before or after the stimulation 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

Figure  z6 
Examples  of  threatening  attitude  and  aggressive  behavior  produced  by 
brain  stimulation.  Observe  that  the  stimulated  monkey  chooses  another 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comHELL  AND  HEAVEN  WITHIN  THE  BRAIN 

one  as  a  specific  target,  and  this  animal  usually  expresses  submissiveness 
by  grimacing,  crouching,  or  escaping.  A  toy  tiger  is  also  a  suitable  target 
for  aggressive  display. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

hour,  showing  that  alterations  in  Lina's  aggressive  behavior 
were  determined  by  ESB. 

In summary,  intraspecies  aggression  has  been  evoked  in cats 
and monkeys by electrical stimulation of several  cerebral  struc 
tures,  and  its  expression  is  dependent  on  the  social  setting. 
Unlike purely motor effects including complex sequences which 
have  no social  significance,  an  artificially  evoked  aggressive  act 
may  be  directed  against  a  specific  group  member  or  may  be 
entirely suppressed,  according to  the stimulated subject's social 
rank. 

Many questions remain to be answered. Which cerebral areas 
are  responsible  for  spontaneous  aggressive  behavior?  By  what 
mechanisms are environmental inputs interpreted as undesirable? 
How  does  cultural  training  influence  the  reactivity  of  specific 
cerebral areas?  Can neurophysiological  mechanisms  of violence 
be re-educated, or are individual responses set for life after early 
imprinting?  It is  interesting  that  application  of  ESB  modified 
the  interpretation  of  the  environment,  changing  the  peaceful 
relations  of  a  group  of  animals  into  sudden  overt  hostility. 
The  same  sensory  inputs  provided  by  the  presence  of  other 
animals, which were neutral during control periods, were under 
ESB the cue for a ferocious and well-directed attack. Apparently 
brain  stimulation  introduced  an  emotional  bias  which  altered 
interpretation of the surroundings. 

While neurophysiological  activity  may  be  influenced  or  per 
haps even set  by genetic  factors  and  past  experience,  the  brain 
is  the direct interpreter of environmental  inputs and the deter 
minant of  behavioral responses.  To  understand  the  causes  and 
plan  remedies  for  intraspecific  aggression  in  animals  and  man 
require  knowledge  of  both  sociology  and  neurophysiology. 
Electricity  cannot  determine  the  target  for  hostility  or  direct 
the sequences of aggressive  behavior,  which are  both related  to 
the  past history of the stimulated subject and to  his  immediate 
adaptation  to changing circumstances.  Artificially  triggered and 
spontaneously provoked aggression have many elements in com 
mon,  suggesting  that  in  both  cases  similar  areas  of  the  brain 
have  been  activated. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comHELL  AND  HEAVEN  WITHIN  THE  BRAIN 

133 

While  individual  and  collective  actS  of  violence  may  seem 
rather  distant  from  the  electrical  discharges  of  neurons,  we 
should  remember  that  personality  is  not  in  the  environment 
but  in  the  nervous  tissue.  Possible  solutions  to  undesirable 
aggression  obviously will  not be found  in the use of ESB.  This 
is  only  a  methodology  for  investigation  of  the  problem  and 
acquisition  of  necessary  information  about . the  brain  mecha 
nisms involved. It is well known that medical treatment of cardiac 
patients  is  based  on  anatomical  and  physiological  studies  of 
the heart,  and that without  this information it would not have 
been possible  to discover new drugs or to-give effective  medical 
advice.  Similarly,  without  knowledge  of  the  brain  it  will  be 
difficult  to  correlate  social  causality with  individual  reactivity. 

Anxiety,  Fear,  and  Violence  Evoked  by  ESB  in  Man 

Anxiety has  been considered the alpha and omega of psychi 
atry. It is one of the central themes of existential philosophy, and 
it  shades  the  normal~and  abnormal-life  of  most  human 
beings.  Several  emotional  states  may  be  classified  under  the 
heading  of  anxiety,  including  fear,  fright,  panic,  and  terror, 
which  are  variations  of  the  same  basi<:  experience;  One of the 
most  complex  mental  disturbances,  unrea5onable  or  excessive 
anxiety,  including  phobias  and  compulsive  obsessions,  often 
does not respond to standard therapies, and in some instances it 
has  been  improved  by  electrocoagulation  of discrete  areas  of 
the frontal  pole.  Grey Walter (234)  has claimed an 85  per cent 
total social recovery in a group ofsixty patients with anxiety and 
obsessions  treated  with  carefully  dosified  coagulations  made 
through electrodes  implanted in the frontal  lobes. 

Without entering into semantic discussions, we may consider 
anxiety an emotional state of conscious or subconscious  tension 
related to real  or imaginary threats to psychological  or physical 
individual  integrity.  A  mild  degree  of  anxiety  may  mobilize, 
while excessive degrees may paralyze somatic and mental activity. 
Beyond  a  certain  limit,  anxiety  has  unpleasant characteristics. 
In normal circumstances, it is produced, as is any other emotion, 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

1 34 
by  sensory  inputs  from  the  environment  and  by  recollections, 
both  of  which  require  mental  elaboration  of  messages  which 
may be influenced by humoral and neuronal factors.  In addition, 
there is abundant evidence that anxiety and fear may be induced 
as either a primary or a secondary category of response by direct 
electrical  stimulation  of  the  brain.  The  perception  or  expect 
ancy of pain can be frightening, and in some cases when ESB pro 
duced  localized  or  generalized  discomfort,  patients  have  ex 
pressed  concern ·about  continuation  of  the  exploratory  pro 
cedures.  In addition  to  the natural  fear  of possible  further  dis 
comfort,  there may have been a  component of  primary anxiety 
which would be difficult  to evaluate. 

Destruction  of discrete  parts of the  thalamus  produces relief 
from anxiety neurosis  and obsessive-compulsive  neurosis  which 
is  probably related to the interruption of tonic  pathways  to  the 
frontal  lobes.  Stimulation  of  the  thalamic  nucleus,  however, 
very  seldom  produces  anxiety,  and  the  reports  of  patients  are 
limited to feelings  of weakness,  being different,  dizziness,  float 
ing, and something like alcoholic  intoxication  (214). 

Clearer demonstrations of direct induction of fear without any 
other  accompanying  sensations  have  been  reported  by  several 
investigators.  Lesions in the medial thalamus give effective  pain 
relief with a minimal amount of sensory loss, and for this reason 
this area has often been explored electrically in cancer patients. 
In some  cases  it has  produced acute anxiety attacks,  which  one 
patient vividly described as:  "It's rather like the feeling of having 
just been missed by a car and leaped back to the curb and went 
B-r-r-r." Something in his guts felt very unpleasant, very unusual, 
and he certainly did not want to feel  like  that again  (73).  The 
surprising fact  is  that  the  unpleasant  sensation  of  fear  was  felt 
in one  side of the body,  contralateral  to  the  brain stimulation. 
Sweet  ( 2 2 1)  has  reported  the case  of a  very  intelligent  patient, 
the  dean  of  a  graduate  school,  who  after  a  unilateral  sympa 
thectomy  to treat his  upper limb  hyperhydrosis,  found  that his 
previous and customary sensation of shivering while listening to 
a stirring passage of music occurred in only one side and he could 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comHELL  AND  HEAVEN  WITHIN  THE  BRAIN 

135 

not be thrilled in the sympathectomized half of his body.  These 
cases were interesting because emotions are  usually experienced 
in  a  rather diffuse  and bilateral  fashion  unless  innervation  has 
been specifically interrupted. 

The role of the thalamus in the integration of fear is also sug 
gested by the study of a  female  patient whose  spontaneous crip 
pling  attacks  of  anxiety  of  overwhelming  intensity  had  led  to 
several  suicide  attempts  and  a  chronic  state  of  depression  and 
agitation quite refractory  to  drugs  and psychotherapy.  Stimula 
tion of the dorsolateral nucleus of the thalamus evoked precisely 
the  same  type  of  attack  at a  level  of  symptomatology  directly 
proportional to the applied intensity. It was  possible to find the 
electrical  threshold for a mild anxiety or to increase it to higher 
levels simply by turning the dial of the stimulator.  "One could 
sit  with  one's  hand  on  the  knob  and  control  the  level  of  her 
anxiety" (73). 

In  one  of our female  patients,  stimulation  of  a  similar  area 
in  the  thalamus  induced  a  typical  fearful  expression  and  she 
turned  to  eith~r siae:  visually  exploring  the  room  behind  her. 
When  asked / what  she  was  doing,  she  replied  that  she  felt  a 
threat and thought that something horrible was going to happen. 
This fearful  sensation was  perceived as real, and she had a  pre 
monition  of  imminent  disaster  of  unknown  cause.  The  effect 
was  reliable on different days  and was  not altered by the use of 
lights and a  movie camera to document the finding.  Her motor 
activity  and  choice  of  words  varied  according  to  the  environ 
mental  setting,  but her facial  expression and acute sensation of 
nonspecific,  unexplainable,  but real  fear were similar following 
different stimulations.  The response started with a  delay of less 
than one second,  lasted  for  as  long as  the  stimulation,  and did 
not leave  observable  aftereffects.  The  patient  remembered  her 
fear  but was  not upset by the memory. 

Some  patients  have  displayed  anxiety  and  restlessness  when 
the  pallidum  was  stimulated  at  frequencies  above  8  cycles  per 
second, and they also  perceived a constriction or warmth in the 
chest  (123).  A  few  reported  a  "vital  anxiety  in  the  left  chest," 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

and screamed anxiously if the stimulation was repeated.  Intense 
emotional  reactions  have  been  evoked  by  stimulation  of  the 
amygdaloid  nucleus,  but  responses  varied  in  the  same  patient 
even  with  the  same  parameters  of stimulation.  The  effect  was 
sometimes rage, sometimes fear.  One patient explained, "I don' t 
know what came over me. I  felt like an animal" (wo). 

The sensation of fear  without any concomitant pain has also 
been  observed  as  a  result  of  ESB  of  the  temporal  lobe  (230). 
This effect  may be classified  as  "illusion of fear"  ( 17 4)  because 
there  was  obviously no real  reason  to  be  afraid  apart  from  the 
artificial  electrical  activation  of  some  cerebral  structures.  In 
every  case,  however,  fear  is  a  cerebral  interpretation of reality 
which depends on a  variety of cultural  and experiential  factors 
with logical  or illogical reasons.  The fact  that it can be aroused 
by stimulation of a few areas of the brain allows the exploration 
of  the  neuronal  mechanisms  of  anxiety,  and  as  a  working  hy 
pothesis  we  may  suppose  that  the  emotional  qualities  of  fear 
depend  on  the  activation  of  determined  structures  located 
probably in the  thalamus,  amygdala,  and a  few  other as  yet  un 
identified  nuclei.  This  activation  usually  depends  on  the  sym 
bolic  evaluation  of coded  sensory inputs,  but the  threshold for 
this  activation  may  be  modified-and  also  reached-by  direct 
application  of  ESB.  Knowledge  of  intracerebral  mechanisms 
of  anxiety  and  fear  will  permit  the  establishment  of  a  more 
rational  pharmacological  and  psychiatric  treatment  of  many 
suffering  patients,  and  may  also  help  us  to  understand  and 
ameliorate  the  increasing  level  of  anxiety  in  our  civilization. 
It  is  also  known  that  in  some  tragic  cases,  abnormal  neuro 
logical  processes  may be  the causal  factor  for  unreasonable and 
uncontrollable violence.  Those afflicted may often hurt or even 
kill  either  strangers  or  close  family  members  usually  treated 
with  affection.  A  typical  example  was  J. P .,  a  charming  and 
attractive  20-year-old  girl  with  a  history  of  encephalitis  at  the 
age of eighteen months and many crises of temporal lobe seizures 
and grand mal attacks for  the last ten years  (6o ).  Her main social 
problem was  the frequent and unpredictable occurrence of rage 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comHELL  AND  HEAVEN  WITHIN  THE  BRAIN 

137 

which  on  more  than  a  dozen  occasions  resulted  in  an  assault 
on  another  person  such  as  inserting  a  knife  into  a  stranger's 
myocardium  or  a  pair  of  scissors  into  the  pleural  cavity  of  a 
nurse.  The patient was  committed to a  ward for  the criminally 
insane,  and  electrodes  were  implanted  in  her  amygdala  and 
hippocampus for exploration of possible neurological abnormal 
ities.  As  she  was  rather  impulsive,  confinement  in  the  EEG 
recording room was  impractical, and she became one of the first 
clinical  cases  instrumented  with  a  stimoceiver,  which  made  it 
possible  to  study  intracerebral  activity  without  restraint  (see 
Figure  4).  Depth  recordings  taken  while  the  patient  moved 
freely  around  the  ward  demonstrated  marked  electrical  abnor 
malities  in  both  amygdala  and  hippocampus.  Spontaneous 
periods  of  aimless  walking  coincided  with  an  increase  in  the 
number of high-voltage sharp waves. At other times, the patient's 
speech  was  spontaneously inhibited for  several  minutes during 
which she could not answer any questions although she retained 
partial comprehension and awareness.  These periods coincided 
with  bursts  of  spike  activity  localized  to  the  optic  radiation 
(Figure  17).  Transitory  emotional  excitement was  related  with 
an increase  in  the number and duration of  16-cycles-per-second 
bursts; but the patient read papers, conversed with other people, 
and  walked  around  without  causing  any  noticeable  alterations 
in  the  telemetered intracerebral electrical activity. 

During  depth  explorations,  it  was  demonstrated  that  crises 
of assaultive behavior similar to the patient's spontaneous bursts 
of anger could be elicited by radio  stimulation of contact  3  in 
the  right amygdala.  A  1.2  milliampere  excitation  of  this  point 
was  applied  while  she  was  playing the  guitar and singing  with 
enthusiasm and skill.  At the seventh  second of stimulation,  she 
threw  away  the  guitar  and  in  a  fit  of rage  launched  an  attack 
against  the  wall  and  then  paced  around  the  floor  for  several 
minutes,  after which  she  gradually quieted  down  and  resumed 
her  usual  cheerful  behavior.  This  effect  was  repeated  on  two 
different  days.  The  fact  that  only  the  contact  located  in  the 
amygdala induced rage suggested that the neuronal field around 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comA 

8 

c 

S l l 

J. P. m-sa 

3 

2 

3 

2 

3 

Figure 17 
Telemetric  recording  of  electrical  activity  of  the  brain  in  one  of  the  pa 
tients  shown  in  Figure  4·  The  location  of  the  contacts  was  as  follows : 
Channel  I:  amygdaloid nucleus;  Channel  2:  anterior optic radiation;  Ch~n­
nel  3:  posterior  optic  radiation.  A:  spontaneous  bursts  appearing  in 
Channel  1  were  more  prominent  when  the  patient  was  psychologically 
excited.  B :  sudden  spontaneous  arrest  of  speech  coincided  with  bursts 
of  spikes  in  Channel  3·  C:  control  recordings  were  unmodified  by 
friendly  behavior  or  by  different  types  of  motor  activity  such  as  walking 
and  reading  (6o). 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comHELL  AND  HEAVEN  WITHIN  THE  BRAIN 

139 

contact  3  was  involved  in  the  patient's  behavior  problem,  and 
this  finding  was  of great clinical  significance  in the orientation 
of subsequent  treatment by local coagulation. 

The demonstration · that amygdaloid  stimulation may induce 
violent behavior has  also  been provided  by other investigators. 
King  ( 128)  has described  the  case  of a  woman with  feelings  of 
depression and alienation,  with an extremely  flat  tone of voice 
and a facial expression which was  blank and unchanging during 
interviews,  who  upon  stimulation  of  the  amygdala  with  5 
milliamperes  had greatly altered  vocal inflections and an angry 
expression. During this  time she said,  "I feel like I  want to get 
up from  this  chair!  Please don't let me do it! Don't do this  to 
me.  I  don't want to  be  mean!"  When  the  interviewer  asked  if 
she would like to hit him,  the patient answered,  "Yeah,  I  want 
to  hit something.  I  want  to get  something aild  just tear  it up. 
Take it so I won't!" She then handed her scarf to the interviewer 
who  gave  her  a  stack  of  paper,  and  without  any other  verbal 
exchange,  she  tore  it  into shreds  saying,  "I  don't like  to  feel 
like  this."  When  the  level  of  stimulation  was  reduced  to  4 
milliamperes,  her  attitude changed  to  a  broad  smile,  and  she 
explained,  "I know  it's  sllly,  what  I'm  doing.  I  wanted  to  get 
up from  this chair and run.  I  wanted to hit something,  tear up 
something-anything.  Not  you, . just  anything.  I  just  wanted 
to get up and tear.  I  had no control of myself."  An increase  in 
intensity up  to  5 milliamperes again resulted in similar aggres 
sive  manifestations,  and she raised her arm as  if to strike. 

It is  notable  that although  the  patients seemed  to  be  out of 
control in these two -instances of electrically induced aggression, 
they did  not attack  the  interviewer,  indicating  that  they  were 
aware  of  their  social  situation.  This  finding  is  reminiscent  of 
the  behavior of stimulated monkeys who directed  their aggres 
siveness  according  to  previous  experience  and  social rank  and 
did not dare to challenge the,authority ofwell-established bosses. 
Apparently ESB can mduce a state of increased violent reactivity 
which is  expressed in accordance . with individual structure and 
environmental  circumstances.  We may conclude  therefore  that 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

artificially evoked emotional change is  only one more  factor  in 
the constellation of behavioral determinants. 

Pleasurable  Excitation  of  the  Animal  Brain 

It is  surprising  that  in  science  as  well  as  in  literature  more 
attention  has  been  paid  to  suffering  than  to  happiness.  The 
central  theme of most novels is  tragedy,  while happy books  are 
hard to  find;  excellent monographs  have  been  published about 
pain, but similar studies of pleasure are nonexistent. Typically, 
in  the  monumental  Handbook  of  the  American  Physiological 
Society  (75),  a  full  chapter  is  devoted  to  pain,  and  pleasure  is 
not even listed in the general subject index.  Evidently the  pur 
suit of happiness  has  not aroused  as  much  scientific  interest  as 
the fear of pain. 

In psychological  literature  the study of reward  is  well repre 
sented,  but even there it has  been considered a  second-rate sen 
sation  and  perhaps  an  artifact  of a  diminution  of  pain.  It has 
been postulated that a  truly "pleasant" sensation could not exist 
because  organisms  have ·a  continuous  tendency  to  minimize 
incoming  stimuli.  Pleasure  was  thus  considered  a  subjective 
name  for  the  diminution  of  drive,  the  withdrawal  of  a  strong 
stimulation,  or  the  reduction  of  pain.  This  "pain  reduction" 
theory (154)  has been fruitful as a basis for psychological investi 
gations,  but it  is  gloomy  to  think  that  we  live  in  a world  of 
punishment in which  the only reality is  suffering and  that our 
brain can perceive different degrees of pain but no real pleasure. 
Interest  in  the  earlier  ideas  of  hedonism  has  been  renewed 
by recent  experimental  studies.  According  to  this  theory,  pain 
and  pleasure  are relatively  independent  sensations  and  can  be 
evoked  by  different  types  of  stimuli  which  are  recognized  by 
separate  cerebral  mechanisms.  Behavior  is  coi}sidered  to  be 
motivated  by  stimuli  which  the  organism  tries  to  minimize 
(pain)  or  by  stimuli  which  the  organism  tries  to  maximize 
(pleasure).  The  brain  is  thought  to  have  different  systems  for 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comHELL  AND  HEAVEN  WITHIN  THE  BRAIN 

141 

the reception of these two kinds of inputs, and the psychological 
state of pleasure or reward can  be determined not  only  by  the 
termination  of pain  but also  by  the  onset  of  primary pleasure. 
The discovery  of  two  anatomically  distinct  mechanisms  in  the 
brain,  one  for  punishment,  as  mentioned  earlier,  and  one  for 
reward,  provides  a  physiological  basis  for  the  dualistic  motiva 
tion  postulated  in hedonism  (62,  165). 

The surprising fact is  that animals of different species, includ 
ing rats,  cats,  and  monkeys,  have  voluntarily chosen  to  press  a 
lever  which  provides  electrical  stimulation  of specific  cerebral 
areas.  The  demonstrations  are  highly  convincing  because  ani 
mals  which  initially  pressed  a  lever  to  obtain  the  reward  of 
sugar pellets later  pressed at similar or  higher  rates ·when elec 
trical  stimulation  was  substituted  for  food.  These  experiments 
showed conclusively  that the animals enjoyed  the  electrical im 
pulses which were delivered only at their own demand.  Watch 
ing  a  rat  or  monkey  stimulate  its  own  brain  is  a  fascinating 
spectacle.  Usually  each  lever  pressing  triggers  a  brief  0.5-to 
1.0-second  brain  stimulation  which  can  be  more  rewarding 
than food.  In a  choice situation,  hungry rats .ran faster  to reach 
the  self-stimulation  lever  than  to  obtain  pellets,  and  they  per 
sistently pressed this lever, ignoring food within easy reach.  Rats 
have removed obstacles,  run mazes,  and even crossed  electrified 
floors  to reach  the lever that provided cerebral stimulation. 

Not  all  areas  of  the  brain  involved  in  pleasurable  effects 
appear  equally  responsive.  The  highest  lever·pressing  rates  (of 
up  to  a  remarkable  5,000  times  per  hour)  were  recorded  by 
animals  self-stimulating  in  the  posterior  hypothalamus;  excita 
tion  of rhinencephalic  structures  (of  only  about  200  times  per 
hour)  was  considered  moderately rewarding;  and  in sensory  or 
motor  areas,  animals  self-stimulated  at  merely  a  chance  level 
(of  10  to  25  times  per  hour),  and  these  areas  were  classified  as 
neutral.  As  should  be  expected,  when  stimulation  was  shifted 
from rewarding areas  to nuclei in the punishment system in the 
same animals,  they pressed the lever once and never went back, 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com142 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

showing  that  in  the  brain  of  the  same  animal  there  were  two 
different  groups  of  structures,  one  rewarding  and  the  other 
aversive. 

A  systematic  analysis  of  the  neuroanatomical  distribution 
of pleasurable areas in the rat ( 164) shows that 6o per cent of the 
brain is  neutral,  35  per cent is  rewarding,  and only  5  per cent 
may  elicit  punishing  effects.  The  idea  that  far  more  brain  is 
involved  in  pleasure  than  in  suffering  is  rather optimistic  and 
gives  hope that this  predominance of the  potential  for  pleasur 
able sensations can be developed into a more effective behavioral 
reality. 

Because  of  the  lack  of  verbal  communication  with  animals, 
any  ideas  about  what  kind  of pleasure,  if any,  may  be  experi 
enced during  ESB  is  a  matter  of  speculation.  There  are  some 
indications,  however,  that  the  perceived  sensations  could  be 
related to anatomical differentiation of primary rewards of food 
and sex,  because hungry animals self-stimulated at a  higher rate 
in  the  middle  hypothalamus,  while  administration  of  sexual 
hormones to castrated rats increased their lever pressing of more 
lateral  hypothalamic  points. 

The controversial issue of how these findings  in animals  may 
relate to human behavior and the possible existence of areas in 
volved in pleasure in the human brain has  been resolved  by the 
information obtained in  patients with  implanted  electrodes. 

Human Pleasure Evoked  by  ESB 

On  the  basis  of  many  studies  during  cerebral  surgery,  Pen 
field  (174) has said of anger, joy, pleasure, and sexual excitement 
in  the human brain that "so far as  our experience goes,  neither 
localized epileptic discharge nor electrical stimulation is capable_ 
of awakening any such emotion.  One is  tempted  to believe  that 
there  are  no  specific  cortical  mechanisms  associated  with  these 
emotions." This statement still holds true for the cerebral cortex, 
but studies  in  human  subjects  with  implanted  electrodes  have 
demonstrated  that  electrical  stimulation  of  the  depth  of  the 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comHELL  AND  HEAVEN  WITHIN  THE  BRAIN 

143 

brain can induce pleasurable manifestations, as evidenced by the 
spontaneous  verbal  reports  of  patients,  their  facial  expression 
and general behavior, and their desire to repeat the experience. 
In a group of twenty-three patients suffering from schizophrenia 
(g8),  electrical stimulation of the septal region,  located deep  in 
the frontal  lobes,  produced an  enhancement of alertness  some 
times  accompanied  by  an  increase  in  verbal  output,  euphoria, 
or  pleasure.  In  a  more  systematic  study  in  another  group  of 
patients, further evidence was  presented of the rewarding effects 
of septal stimulation (20,  gg).  One man suffering from narcolep 
sia was  provided with a  small stimulator and a  built-in counter 
which  recorded the  number of  times  that  he  voluntarily  stim 
ulated each of several selected points in his brain during a period 
of  seventeen  weeks.  The highest  score  was  recorded  from  one 
point in the septal region, and the patient declared that pushing 
this particular button made him feel  ''good" as if he were build 
ing up to a sexual orgasm, although he was not able to reach the 
end point and often felt  impatient and anxious.  His narcolepsia 
was  greatly  relieved  by  pressing  this  "septal  button."  Another 
patient  with  psychomotor  epilepsy  also  enjoyed  septal  self 
stimulation, which again had the highest rate of button pressing 
and  often  induced  sexual  thoughts.  Activation  of  the  septal 
region  by direct injection of acetylcholine  produced local  elec 
trical changes in two epileptic patients and a shift in mood from 
disphoria  to  contentment and euphoria,  usually  with  concomi 
tant  sexual  motivation and  some  "orgastic  sensations." 

Further information was  provided by another group of sixty 
five  patients suffering from schizophrenia or Parkinson's disease, 
in whom a  total of 643  contacts were  implanted,  mainly  in  the 
anterior part of  the  brain  (201).  Results  of  ESB  were  grouped 
as  follows:  360  points  were  "Positive  1,"  and  with  stimulation 
"the patients became relaxed, at ease, had a feeling of well-being, 
andjor were  a  little sleepy."  Another  31  points  were  "Positive 
II,"  and  "the  patients were  definitely  changed  ... in  a  good 
mood, felt good.  They were relaxed, at ease, and enjoyed them 
selves,  frequently smiling.  There was  a  slight euphoria,  but the 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

144 
behavior was adequate." They sometimes wanted more stimula 
tions.  Excitation of another eight points evoked behavior classi 
fied as "Positive III,"  when ''the euphoria was definitely beyond 
normal  limits.  The  patients  laughed  out  loud,  enjoyed  them 
selves,  and positively liked the stimulation, and wanted more." 
ESB  of another  38  points gave  ambivalent results,  and  the  pa 
tients  expressed  occasional  pleasure  or  displeasure  following 
excitation of the same area.  From  three other points, responses 
were  termed  "orgasm"  because  the  patients  initially  expressed 
enjoyment and then suddenly were completely satisfied and did 
not  want  any  more  stimulation  for  a  variable  period  of  time. 
Finally,  from  about  two  hundred  other  points,  ESB  produced 
unpleasant  reactions  including  anxiety,  sadness,  depression, 
fear, and emotional outbursts. One of the moving pictures taken 
in  this  study  was  very  demonstrative,  showing  a  patient  with 
a sad expression and slightly depressed  mood who smiled when 
a  brief stimulation was  applied to the rostral  part of the  brain, 
returning quickly to his usual depressed state,  to smile  again as 
soon  as  stimulation  was  reapplied.  Then a  ten-second  stimula 
tion completely changed his behavior and facial  expression into 
a  lasting pleasant and happy mood.  Some  mental  patients have 
been  provided with  portable stimulators which  they have  used 
in self-treatment of depressive states  with apparent clinical  suc 
cess. 

These results indicate the need for careful functional explora 
tion  during brain surgery in order to avoid excessive  euphoria 
or  depression  when  positive  or  negative  reinforcing  areas  are 
damaged. Emotional instability, in which the subject bursts sud 
denly  into  tears  or  laughter  without  any  apparent  reason,  has 
been  observed  following  some  neurosurgical  interventions. 
These  major  behavior  problems  might  have  been  avoided  by __ 
sparing  the  region  involved  in  emotional  regulation. 

In our own experience,  pleasurable sensations  were  observed 
in  three  patients with  psychomotor  epilepsy  (so,  s8,  IOg).  The 
first  case  was  V.P.,  a  36-year-old  female  with  a  long  history  of 
epileptic attacks which  could  not be controlled  by medication. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comHELL  AND  HEAVEN  WITHIN  THE  BRAIN 

145 

Electrodes were implanted in her right temporal lobe and upon 
stimulation of a contact located in the superior part about thirty 
millimeters  below  the  surface,  the  patient  reported  a  pleasant 
tingling  sensation  in  the  left  side  of  her  body  "from  my  face 
down to the bottom of my legs." She started giggling and making 
funny  comments,  stating  that  she  enjoyed  the  sensation  "very 
much."  Repetition of these stimulations made the patient more 
communicative and flirtatious, and she ended by openly express 
ing her desire  to marry the therapist.  Stimulationof other cere 
bral  points  failed  to  modify  her  mood  and  indicated  the 
specificity of the evoked effect.  During control interviews before 
and after ESB, her behavior was  quite proper, without familiar 
ity or excessive  friendliness. 

The second  patient was  J .M., an  attractive,  cooperative,  and 
intelligent 3o-year-old female  who had suffered for  eleven years 
from psychomotor and grand mal attacks which resisted medical 
therapy.  Electrodes were  implanted in her right temporal  lobe, 
and stimulation of one of  the  points  in  the  amygdala  induced 
a  pleasant  sensation  of  relaxation  and  considerably  increased 
her  verbal  output,  which  took  on  a  more  intimate  character. 
This  patient  openly  expressed  her  fondness  for  the  therapist 
(who  was  new  to  her),  kissed  his  hands,  and  talked  about  her 
immense gratitude for  what was  being done  for  her.  A  similar 
increase in verbal and emotional expression was  repeated when 
the same point was stimulated on a different day,  but it did not 
appear  when  other  areas  of  the  brain  were  explored.  During 
control  situations  the  patient  was  rather  reserved  and  poised. 
The third case was A.F., an 11-year-old boy with severe psycho 
motor  epilepsy.  Six  days  after  electrode  implantation  in  both 
temporal  lobes,  his  fourth  tape-recorded  interview  was  carried 
out  while  electrical  activity  of  the  brain  was  continuously  re 
corded and 5-second stimulations were applied in a prearranged 
sequence  at  intervals  of  about  four  minutes.  The  interviewer 
maintained an air of friendly  interest throughout, usually with 
out  initiating  conversation.  After  six  other  excitations,  point 
LP  located  on  the  surface  of  the  left  temporal  lobe  was  stim-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

ulated for the first  tim,e,  and there was  an open and precipitous 
declaration  of  pleasure.  The  patient  had  been  silent  for  the 
previous  five-minute  interval,  but immediately  after  this  stim 
ulation he exclaimed, "Hey! You can keep me here longer when 
you  give  me  these;  I  like  those."  He went on  to insist  that  the 
ongoing brain tests made him feel good. Similar statements with 
an  emphatic  expression  of  "feeling  good"  followed  eight  of  a 
total sixteen stimulations of this point during the ninety-minute 
interview.  Several  of  these  manifestations  were  accompanied 
by  a  statement  of  fondness  for  the  male  interviewer,  and  the 
last one was accompanied by a voluptuous stretch. None of these 
manifestations  appeared  during  the  control  prestimulation  pe 
riod  of  twenty-six  minutes  or  during  the  twenty-two  minutes 
when other points were excited. Statistical analysis of the differ 
ence  between  the  frequency  of  pleasurable  expressions  before 
and after  onset  of stimulations  proved  that results  were  highly 
significant  (P < o.oo1 ). 

The open  expressions  of  pleasure  in  this  interview  and  the 
general  passivity  of  behavior  could  be  linked,  more  or  less 
intuitively,  to  feminine  strivings.  It was  therefore  remarkable 
that in the next interview,  performed in a  similar manner,  the 
patient's expressions of confusion about his own sexual  identity 
again appeared following stimulation of point LP. He suddenly 
began to discuss his desire to get married, but when asked,  "To 
whom?"  he  did  not  immediately  reply.  Following  stimulation 
of  another  point and  a  one-minute,  twenty-second  silence,  the 
patient said, "I was  thinking-there's--! was  saying this  to you. 
How to spell  'yes'-y-e-s.  I  mean y-o-s.  No!  'You'  ain't y-e-o.  It's 
this.  Y-o-u."  The topic was  then completely dropped.  The mon 
itor  who  was  listening  from  the  next  room  interpreted  this  as 
a thinly veiled wish to marry the interviewer, and it was decided 
to  stimulate  the same site again  after  the  prearranged schedule 
had been completed. During the following forty  minutes, seven 
other  points  were  stimulated,  and  the  patient  spoke  about 
several  topics  of  a  completely  different  and  unrelated  con 
tent.  Then  LP  was  stimulated  again,  and  the  patient  started 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comHELL  AND  HEAVEN  WITHIN  THE  BRAIN 

147 

making references  to the facial  hair of the  interviewer and con 
tinued by mentioning pubic hair and his having been the object 
of genital sex  play in  the  past.  He  then  expressed  doubt  about 
his  sexual  identity,  saying,  "I  was  thinkin'  if  I  was  a  boy  or a 
girl-which  one  I'd  like  to  be."  Following  another  excitation 
he  remarked  with  evident  pleasure:  "You're  doin'  it  now," 
and then he said,  ''I'd like  to  be a  girl." 

In the interpretation of these results it is  necessary to consider 
the psychological context in which electrical stimulation occurs, 
because  the  personality configuration  of  the  subject,  including 
both current psychodynamic  and  psychogenetic aspects,  may  be 
an essential determinant of the results of stimulation. Expression 
of  feminine  strivings  in  our  patient  probably  was  not  the  ex 
clusive effect  of  ESB  but the  expression of already  present  per 
sonality  factors  which  were  activated  by  the  stimulation.  The 
balance  between  drive  and  defense  may  be  modified  by  ESB, 
as  suggested  by  the  fact  that  after  one  stimulation  the  patient 
said without apparent anxiety,  ''I'd like to be a  girl,"  but when 
this  idea  was  presented to  him by the  therapist in a  later inter 
view without stimulation, the patient became markedly anxious 
and  defensive.  Minute-to-minute  changes  in  personality  func 
tion,  influenced by  the environment and by patient-interviewer 
relations, may modify the nature of specific responses,  and these 
variables,  which are difficult  to assess,  must be kept in mind. 

Friendliness  and  Increased  Conversation 
Under  Electrical  Control 

Human  relations  evolve  between  the  two  opposite  poles  of 
love  and  hate  which  are  determined  by  a  highly  complex  and 
little understood combination of elements including basic drives, 
cultural  imprinting,  and  refined  emotional  and  intellectual 
characteristics. This subject has so many semantic and conceptual 
problems  that  few  investigators  have  dared  to  approach  it  ex 
perimentally,  and  in  spite  of  its  essential  importance,  most 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL OF  THE  MIND 

textbooks  of psychology  evade  its  discussion.  To define  friend 
liness  is  difficult  although  its  identification  in  typical  cases  is 
easy,  and  in our daily  life  we  are continuously  evaluating and 
classifying  personal  contacts  as  friendly  or  hostile.  A  smiling 
face,  attentive eyes,  a  receptive  hand, related body  posture,  in 
tellectual  interest,  ideological  agreement,  kind  words,  sympa 
thetic  comments,  and  expressions  of  personal  acceptance  are 
among the common indicators of cordial interpersonal relations. 
The expression of friendship  is  a  part of social  behavior which 
obviously  requires  contact  between  two  or  more  individuals. 
A  mutually  pleasurable  relation  creates  a  history  and  provides 
each  individual  with a  variety  of  optic,  acoustic,  tactile,  and 
other stimuli which are received and interpreted with a "friendly 
bias." The main characteristic of love and friendship is  precisely 
that  stimuli  coming  from  a  favored  person  are  interpreted  as 
mote  agreeable  than  similar  stimuli  originating  from  other 
sources,  and  this  evaluation  is  necessarily  related  to  neuronal 
activity. 

Little is known about the cerebral mechanisms of friendliness, 
but as  is  the case for any behavorial manifestation, no emotional 
state  is  possible  without  a  functioning  brain,  and  it  may  be 
postulated  that  some  cerebral  structures  are  dispensable  and 
others  indispensable  both for  the  interpretation  of sensory  in 
puts  as  amicable  and  for  the  expression  of  friendship.  Strong 
support for  this idea derives from the fact,  repeatedly proved in 
neurosurgery,  that destruction of some  parts of the brain, such 
as  the motor and sensory cortices,  produces motor deficits with 
out modifying affective  behavior,  while  ablation  of  the  frontal 
lobes  may  induce  considerable  alteration  of  emotional  per 
sonality.  Further support has  been  provided  by  electrical  stim 
ulation  of the  frontal  lobes,  which  may  induce  friendly  mani 
festations. 

In patient A.  F.,  mentioned earlier in connection with pleas 
urable manifestations,  the  third interview was  characterized  by 
changes in the character and degree of verbal  output following 
stimulation  of  one  point  in  the  temporal  cortex.  Fourteen 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comHELL  AND  HEAVEN  WITHIN  THE  BRAIN 

149 

stimulations  were  applied,  seven  of theiJl  through  point  RP 
located in the inferolateral part of the right frontal  lobe cortex, 
and  the other seven  through  contacts located on  the  cortex  of 
the  right  temporal  lobe  and  depth  of the  left and  right  tem 
poral  lobes.  The interview  started  with  about tive  minutes  of 
lively conversation, and during the nex.t ten minutt:s the patient 
gradually quieted down  until  he sp(jke ·only about five  seconds 
during  every  subsequent . tw()~minute peri()(\. Thrqughout -. the 
interview  the  therapist  encouraged  spontaneous  expression  by 
reacting compassionately, by joking with, prging, and reassuring 
the · patient, and by responding to any inf(>rmation offered.  The 
attitude never produced more than a simple reply and often not 
even  that. 

In contrast to  this  basic situation, there w:ete  six.  instances of 
sharp increase in verbal communication and its friendly .content. 
Each of these instances followed within forty · seconds · after stim 
ulation of point RP.The only exception was  the last ex.citation 
of this point when the voltage had been changed. The increases in 
verbal activity were rapid but brief and without any consistency 
in subject material, which was  typical for the patient. Qualifica 
tion  and quantification of  the patient's conversation  was  made 
by analyzing the recorded typescriptwh_ich was divided into two 
minute periods  and judged independently by two investigators 
who had no knowledge of the timing or location of stimulations. 
Comparison  of  the  two-minute  periods  before and after  these 
stimulations -revealed a verbal increase £rom seventeen to eighty 
eight words and a greater number of friendly remarks, from six 
to  fifty-three.  These  results · -were  highly · significant  and  their 
specificity  was  clear  because  no  changes · in verbalization  were 
produced  by  stimulation  of any  of  the -other  cerebral  points. 
It  was  also  evident  that  the  evoked  changes  -were  not  related 
to the interviewer's rather constant verbal activity. It was there 
fore concluded that the impressive increase in verbal expression 
and friendly  remarks was  the result of electrical stimulation of 
a  specific  point on the cortex: .of the temporal lobe. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comHallucinations,  Recollections,  and Illusions 

in  Man 

Hallucinations  may  be  defined  as  false  perceptions  in  the  ab 
sence  of peripheral sensory  stimulation,  and  they  probably de 
pend on two processes:  ( 1)  the recollection of stored information 
and (2) its false interpretation as an extrinsic experience entering 
through sensory inputs. Very little is known about the cerebral 
mechanisms  responsible  for  these  phenomena,  but  apparently 
the  frontotemporal  region  of  the  brain  is  somehow  involved 
because its electrical stimulation may evoke hallucinations. 

In some patients electrical stimulation of the exposed temporal 
lobe has produced the perception of music.  Occasionally it was 
a  determined tune which could be recognized  and hummed by 
the subject, and in some cases it was as  if a radio or record were 
being played in the operating room. The sound did not seem to 
be a  recollection  but resembled  an  actual  experience  in  which 
instruments of an orchestra or words of a song were heard (174). 
These  artificially  induced  hallucinations  were  not  static  but 
unfolded  slowly  while  the  electrode  was  held  in  place.  A  song 
was heard from beginning to end and not all at once; in a dream, 
familiar  places  were  seen  and  well-known  people  spoke  and 
acted. 

Like  spontaneous  memories,  the  recollections  induced  by 
ESB  could bring back the emotions felt at the time of the orig 
inal  experience,  suggesting  that  neuronal  mechanisms  keep  an 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comHALLUCINATIONS,  RECOLLECTIONS,  ILLUSIONS  IN  MAN  151 

integrated  record  of  the  past,  including  all  the  sensory  inputs 
(visual,  auditory,  proprioceptive,  etc.)  and  also  the  emotional 
significance of events.  Electrical stimulation activated  only one 
memory  without  reawakening  any  of the  other  records  which 
must be stored in close  proximity.  This fact  suggests  the  exist 
ence  of  cerebral  mechanisms  of  reciprocal  inhibition  which 
allow  the orderly recall  of specific  patterns of memory without 
a  flood  of unmanageable amounts of stored  information.  In no 
case  has  brain stimulation  produced  two  psychical  experiences 
at  the  same  time,  and  the  responses  have  been  on  an  ali-or 
nothing basis. 

In one  of our patients,  complex  sensory  hallucinations  were 
evoked  on different  days  when  the  depth  of the  tip of  the  left 
temporal  lobe  was  electrically  stimulated.  The  patient  said, 
"You  know,  I  just felt  funny,  just  now .... Right  then  all  of 
a  sudden  somethin'  else  came  to  me-these  people-the  way 
this  person  talked.  This married  couple-as  though  the  fellow 
came  into  my  mind-as  though  like  he  was  saying  somethin' 
like oh my mind drifted for a  minute-to somethin' foolish .... 
It seemed like he was coming out with some word-sayin' some 
word silly." 

The  fact  that  stimulation  of  the  temporal  lobe  can  induce 
complex hallucinations may be considered well established,  and 
this type of research represents a significant interaction between 
neurophysiology  and  psychoanalysis  ( 133).  The  mechanism  of 
the evoked  hallucinations,  however,  is  far  from  clear,  and  it  is 
difficult  to  know  whether  the  experiences  are  new  creations 
based on the recombination of items from memory storage and 
thus equivalent to psychotic hallucinations, or if the experiences 
are simply an exact playback of the past. 

In either case,  the applied electricity is  not "creating" a  new 
phenomenon  but  is  triggering  the  orderly  appearance  at  the 
conscious  level  of materials from  the past,  mixed  in some cases 
with  present perceptions.  The order in the stream of perceived 
information  is  perhaps  one of the  most  interesting qualities  of 
this behavior because it indicates something about the mechan-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

isms  for storage of information in the  brain.  Memory does  not 
seem  to  be preserved as  single  items  but as  interrelated collec 
tions of events, like the  pearls on a  string,  and by pulling any 
pearl  we  have  access  to · the  whole  series  in  perfect  order.  If 
memory were organized in this way,  it would ·be similar to  the 
strings ofamino acids forming molecules of proteins and carry 
ing  genetic  messages.  Electrical  stimulation  may  increase  gen 
eral neuronal excitability;  and the memory traces which at this 
moment have a lower threshold may consequently be reactivated, 
reaching  the  perceptual  level  and  forming  the  content  of  the 
hallucinatory experience while exerting a  reciprocal  inhibitory 
influence upon other traces. The excitability of individual traces 
may  be  modified  by  environmental  factors  and  especially  by 
the ideological content of the patient's thoughts prior to stimula 
tion:  Thus electrical excitation of the same point may produce 
a  series  of thematically  related  hallucinatory  experiences  with 
different · specific  details, as  was  the case  in the patients that we 
have investigated. 

All sensory inputs suffer distortion during the normal process 
of personal interpretation, which is determined to a great extent 
by  past  experience  and depends  heavily  on  cultural  factors.  A 
baby looking at  the moon may extend  his  arms  in  an  attempt 
to catch it without realizing  the remoteness  of celestial  bodies. 
By comparing past and present experiences, we learn to evaluate 
distance,  size,  intensity,  and  other  qualities  of  inputs.  The 
mechanisms for  these evaluations do not seem  to be genetically 
determined and are related  to  neuronal activity  which  may  be 
influenced by direct stimulation of the brain.  We must remem 
ber that our only way to be in touch with external reality is  by 
transducing  physical  and  chemical  events  of  the  surroundings 
into  electrical  and  chemical  sequences  at  the  sensory  receptor... 
level. The brain is not in touch with the environmental reality 
but with  its  symbolic  code  transmitted  by  neuronal  pathways. 
Within this frame of personal distortion, our lives evolve within 
a  range  of  "normality."  Beyond  this  range,  the  distortion  of 
perceptions qualifies as illusion. Illusions occur in a wide variety 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comHALLUCINATIONS,  RECOLLECTIONS,  ILLUSIONS  IN  MAN  153 

of regressed mental states, during moments of keen anticipation, 
and as a  primary manifestation in some epileptic discharges. An 
hallucination  is  a  false  perception  in  the  absence  of  sensory 
inputs,  while  an  illusion  requires  an  external  sensory  source 
which  is  misinterpreted  by  the  individual.  This  distinction  is 
convenient, and it will be observed  in our discussion,  although 
in practice  the terms often overlap. 

The  following  phenomena  have  been  observed  in  patients: 
(1)  illusions (visual,  auditory,  labyrinthine, memory or deja vu, 
sensation  of remoteness  or  unreality),  (2)  emotions  (loneliness, 
fear,  sadness),  (3)  psychical  hallucinations  (vivid  memory  or  a 
dream as  complex as life experience itself), and (4)  forced  think 
ing  (stereotyped  thoughts  crowding  into  the  mind).  The  first 
three groups of phenomena have  been  induced by different  in 
tracerebral  stimulations.  The  most  commonly  reported  effect 
has  been  the  illusion  of familiarity  or  deja  vu,  which  is  char 
acterized  by  surprise,  interruption  of  conversation,  and  im 
mediate spontaneous reporting that something unusual had just 
happened.  For example, after a  stimulation  in the inferolateral 
part of the frontal  lobe, one patient began to reply to  the inter 
viewer's question but suddenly stopped and said, "I was thinkin' 
-it  felt  like  someone  else  was  asking  me  that  before." 
Occasionally  a  previously  initiated  statement  would  be  com 
pleted,  but  there  was  always  an  overt  desire  to  express  the 
perceived  experience.  The  effect  was  clearly  felt  as  intrusive 
although not disturbing.  After several of these  experiences,  the 
patient  recognized  the  special  quality  of  the  phenomena  and 
said,  for  example,  "Hey-1  had  another  strike.  I  have  a  feel 
ing  that  someone  once  told  me  that  before."  The  reliability 
of  the  response  was  remarkable,  as  was  the  consistency  of 
Its  reporting,  which  was  spontaneous  and  in  most  cases  un 
solicited.  Each  instance  consisted  usually  of  a  reference  to  a 
remark made by the patient or the observer just before or during 
the moment of stimulation. The ideational content of the deja 
vu  was  therefore  dissimilar  following  each  stimulation,  but 
it  always  referred  to  the  theme  of  the  ongoing  conversation. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

154 
The common feature was the sensation, expressed by the patient, 
that  the  words,  ideas,  or  situation  were  similar  to  a  previous 
experience.  There was  no new  perception,  only  the  interpreta 
tion of a  novel input as  one already known and familiar.  There 
was  no anxiety or fear  in  the perception of these  illusions,  and 
the apparent effect  was  one of interested surprise  with  a  rather 
pleasant,  amusing  quality  which  made  the  patient  more  alert 
and  communicative.  He  was  eager  to  report  that  something 
similar had happened  before,  and  the  word  "before"  was  used 
in reporting most of these  incidents.  No lasting traces  could be 
detected,  and  after  the  sensation  of  familiarity  had  been  ex 
pressed,  the  patient's  behavior  continued  in  the  same  vein  as 
before stimulation. 

Knowledge  of  the  cerebral  mechanisms  of  psychic  activities 
is  so  elemental that it would  not be wise  to speculate about the 
neuronal causality of illusions  of familiarity.  However,  the fact 
that they may be elicited with reliability indicates  the  probable 
existence  of interpretive functions  in a  determined area  of  the 
brain  and  opens  the  way  for  further  experimental  studies  of 
how  sensory inputs  are  processed  by  the  individual.  Penfield 
supposes  that  the cortex of  the  temporal  lobe  has  a  ganglionic 
mechanism  which  is  utilized  in  the  personal  assessment  of 
experiential  reality  regarding  distance,  sound,  sight,  intensity, 
strangeness,  or  familiarity  of  sensory  inputs.  This  mechanism 
would  be relatively  independent  from  the  mechanism  utilized 
in  the  recording  of  contemporary  experience  and  could  be 
affected by epileptic abnormality or by direct brain stimulation. 
If we  accept  this  hypothesis,  we  may  assume  that  artificial  in 
fluencing  of electrical and chemical  neuronal  physiology could 
play  a  decisive  role  in  the  interpretation  of reality  with  some 
independence from  past experience and personal structure. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comInhibitory  Effects  in Animals  and Man 

The  existence  of  inhibitory  functions  in  the  central  nervous 
system  was  described  in  the  last  century  by  Sechenov  (tg8), 
Pavlov ( 171 ),  and other founders of Russian psychology.  Inhibi 
tion  is  a  well-known  phenomenon,  and  it  has  been  the  main 
theme of several  recent symposiums  (14,  63,  77).  In spite of its 
importance, information  about  inhibitory  mechanisms  has  not 
yet  been  integrated  into  the  general  body  of scientific  knowl 
edge,  and  no chapter is  devoted  to  this  subject  in  most  neuro 
physiological,  psychological,  and  pharmacological  textbooks. 
This  lack  of  interest  is  surprising  because  as  Morgan  ( 158) 
wrote  eighty  years  ago,  "When  physiologists  have  solved  the 
problem of inhibition they will be in a  position to consider that 
of volition," and modern investigators maintain that inhibition 
and choice, rather than expression and learning, are the central 
problems of psychology (63).  A shift in interest among scientists 
seems  necessary  to give  inhibition its deserved  importance,  and 
the  layman should also  be aware  of the decisive  role  of  inhibi 
tion in the  performance of most of our daily activities. 

The sound of a  theater crowd at intermission is  a continuous 
roar  without  intelligible  meaning.  During  the  performance, 
however,  noises and individual conversations must be inhibited 
so  that the voices of the actors can be heard.  The brain is  like a 
monumental  theater  with  many  millions  of  neurons  capable 
of  sending  messages  simultaneously  and  in  many  directions. 
Most of these  neurons are firing  nearly  continuously,  and  their 

155 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

sensitivity  is  like  that of an  enormous  synaptic  powder  barrel 
which  would  explode  in  epileptic  convulsions  in  the  absence 
of inhibitory elements (122). During the organized performance 
of  behavioral  responses,  most  neurons  and  pathways  must  re 
main  silent  to  allow  meaningful . orders  to  circulate  toward 
specific  goals.  Inhibition  is  as  important  as  excitation  for  the 
normal physiology  of the  brain,  and some  structures  have  spe 
cialized  inhibitory  functions.  It should  therefore  be  expected 
that,  in  addition  to  inducing  the  many  types  of  activities  de 
scribed  in  previous  sections,  ESB  can  also  block  performance 
of such  activities  by  exciting pools  of neurons whose  role  is  to 
inhibit these specific responses. 

To behave  is  to  choose  one  pattern  among  many.  To  think 
we  must  proceed  in some  orderly  fashion  repressing  unrelated 
ideas;  to  talk  we must select  a  sequence  of  appropriate words; 
and to listen we  need to extract certain information from  back 
ground  noise.  As  stated by Ashby,  we  niust  "dispose  once  and 
for  all  of  the  idea  .  .  .  that  the  more  communication  there  is 
within the brain the better" (6).  As we know by personal experi 
ence, one of the problems of modem civilization is the confusion 
produced by a  barrage  ofsensory inputs.  We are optically and 
acoustically assaulted by scientific literature, news media, propa 
ganda, and advertisements. The defense is to inhibit the process 
ing  of  sensory  stimuli.  Conscious  and  unconscious  behavioral 
inhibition should not be considered passive processes  but active 
restraints,  like  holding  the . reins  of  a  powerful  horse,  which 
preventthe disorderly display of existing energies and potential 
ities. 

Within  the  central  nervous  system,  the  reticular  formation 
seems  to be especially differentiated  to modulate or inhibit the 
reception of sensory impulses, and some other cerebral structures 
including the thalamus, septum, and caudate nucleus also possess 
important inhibitory properties which can be activated by  ESB. 
Three types of inhibitory processes may be induced by electrical 
stimulation:  (1)  sleep, which usually starts slowly and can easily 
be interrupted by sensory stimuli;  (2)  general inhibition, which 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comINHIBITORY  EFFECTS  IN  ANIMALS  AND  MAN 

157 

affects  the whole body, starts as  soon as  ESB  is  applied, and per 
sists  in spite of sensory stimulation;  and  (3)  specific  inhibition, 
which  appears  immediately,  affects  only  a  determined  pattern 
of behavior such as  aggression  or food  intake,  and  may or may 
not be modified by sensory impulses. 

One example of sleep induced in a monkey by application of 
ESB  is  shown  in  Figure  18.  After 30  seconds  of stimulation  in 
the septal  area,  the  animal's  eyes  started  closing,  his  head low 
ered, his body relaxed, and he seemed to fall into a  natural state 
of sleep.  In response  to  noise  or  to  being  touched,  the  animal 
would slowly open his eyes  and look around with a dull expres 
sion for a few seconds before falling asleep again. Similar results 
have  been  obtained  in  free-ranging  monkeys  stimulated  by 
radio.  In this situation there was  a gradual diminution of spon 
taneous  activity,  and  then  the  animals  beg-an  to  do~, closing 
their  eyes  and  assuming  a  typical  sleeping posture  with  heads 
down and bodies curved over the knees.  Theoretically it should 
be  possible  to  treat  chronic  insomnia  by  brain  stimulation,  or 
to  establish  an artificial  biological  clock  of rest and  activity  by 
means  of  programed  stimulation  of  inhibitory  and  excitatory 
areas of the brain, but these challenging possibi!ities still require 
further  investigations. 

Motor arrest _is  an  impressive  effect  c:;onsisting  of sudden im 
mobilization  of  the  experimental  animal  in  the  middle  of 
ongoing activities, which continue as soon as stimulation is over. 
It is as  if a motion picture projector had been stopped, freezing 
the  subjects  in  the  position  in  which  they  were  caught.  A  cat 
lapping milk has  been  immobilized with  its tongue  out,  and  a 
cat climbing stairs  has  been stopped between two  steps. 

Other  types  of . inhibitory  effects  are  more  specific  and  re 
stricted  to  only  one  determined ·behavioral  category.  Typical 
examples  are  the  inhibition of food  intake,  aggressiveness,  ter 
ritoriality,  and maternal  behavior.  As  these specific  inhibitions 
do  not  influence  general  activities,  they  could  pass · unnoticed 
if the experimental situation was  not properly arranged.  Obvi 
ously  inhibition  of  appetite  cannot  be demonstrated  in  the 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comFigure  r8 
Sleep  induced  by  electrical  stimulation  of  the  brain  is  similar  to  sponta 
neous  sleep.  Above,  control.  Below,  the  monkey  falls  asleep  under  ESB. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comINHIBITORY  EFFECTS  IN  ANIMALS  AND  MAN 

159 

absence  of  food,  nor  can  changes  in  maternal  behavior  be  in 
vestigated  when  no  babies  are  present.  One  example  of  how  a 
hungry  monkey  loses  appetite  under  the  influence  of  brain 
excitation  is  presented  in  Figure  19.  At  the  sight  of  a  banana, 
the  animal  usually  shows  great  interest,  leaning  forward  to 
take  the  fruit,  which  he  eats  voraciously  and  with  evident 
pleasure.  However,  his  appetite  is  immediately  inhibited  as 
soon as  the caudate nucleus  is  electrically stimulated.  Then the 
monkey looks with some interest at the banana without reaching 
for  it,  and  may  even  turn:  his  face  away,  clearly  expressing  re 
fusal.  During stimulation  the  animal  is  well  aware  of  his  sur 
roundings,  reacting  normally  to  noises,  moving  objects,  and 
threats,  but  he  is  just  not  interested  in  food.  If a  monkey  is 
stimulated  when  his  mouth  is  full  of  banana,  he  immediately 
stops  chewing,  takes  the  banana out of  his  mouth,  and  throws 
it away. 

Close  to  the  hunger  inhibitory area  there  is  a  region  which 
is  involved in inhibition of aggressive  behavior. When this  part 
of the caudate  nucleus  is  stimulated  (Figure  20),  the  normally 
ferocious macacus rhesus becomes tranquil, and instead of grab 
bing,  scratching,  and  biting  any  approaching  object,  he  sits 
peacefully and the investigator can safely  touch  his  mouth  and 
pet him.  During this  time  the animal  is  aware  of  the  environ 
ment  but  has  simply  lost  his  usual  irritability,  showing  that 
violence can be inhibited without making the animal sleepy or 
depressed.  Identification  of  the  cerebral  areas  responsible  for 
ferocity  would  make  it  possible  to  block  their  function  and 
diminish undesirable aggressiveness without disturbing general 
behavioral reactivity. 

Similar results  have  been  obtained in chimpanzees,  and  one 
example is  presented in  Figure  21.  Chimpanzee  Carlos  was  an 
affectionate animal who  enjoyed  playing with the  investigators 
and  had  learned  a  variety  of  tricks  including  throwing  and 
catching  a  ball.  Enticed  by  an  expected  food  reward,  he  sat 
voluntarily  in  the  restraining  chair  where  recordings  and  ex 
periments  were  conducted.  Like most  chimpanzees,  Carlos  was 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comhttp:/www.propheticexplorer.comINHIBITORY  EFFECTS  IN  ANIMALS  AND  MAN 

161 

Figure  I9 
The normal reaction of a  monkey is  to stretch its  arms and body  to  take  an 
offered  banana  (above  left).  Appetite  is  immediately  inhibited  by  stimula 
tion  of  the  caudate  nucleus  (below  left).  The  monkey  is  not  interested  in 
food  (above)  and  even  turns  away  from  the  fruit  (53).  Photo:  Eric  Schaal. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comFigure  20 
Rhesus  monkeys  are  usually  ferocious  and will  often  launch  attacks,  trying 
to  catch  and  bite  the  observers  (above).  This  ferocity  is  inhibited  during 
stimulation  of the caudate  nucleus,  and  then  (below)  it is  safe  to  touch  the 
animal,  which extends its  arm  to meet the observer's  hand  without  making 
any  threatening  gestures  (53) · 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comFigure  2I 
Chimpanzee  Carlos  reacts  wi th  offensi ve-defe nsive  m anifestations  when 
touched  by  a  stra nger  (left).  During  caud ate  stimula tion,  the  chimpa nzee 
is  inhibited  a nd  ca n  be  teased  without  evoking  a ny  response . 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL OF  THE  MIND 

rather  temperamental  and was  easily  provoked into a  tantrum 
by being punished, frustrated,  or merely teased.  He liked to be 
touched by people he knew but not by strangers. Figure 21  (left) 
shows  his  defensive,  anxious  reaction  when  approached  by  an. 
unfamiliar investigator. His fear  and aggressive  manifestations 
were,  however,  completely  inhibited  during  electrical  stimula 
tion of the caudate nucleus, as  shown  in Figure  21  (right).  The 
animal displayed no-emotion, _ appeared peaceful,  and could be 
teased  without any resulting disturbance. 

Other  experiments  in  monkeys  have  also  confirmed  the 
pacifying possibilities of ESB.  In the autocratic social structure 
of a monkey colony  the boss  enjoys  a  variety  of privileges  such 
as  choosing  female  · partners,  feeding  first,  displacing  other 
animals, and occupying most of the cage while the other monkeys 
avoid  his  proximity  and  crowd  together  in  a  far  comer  (see 
Figure  22).  This  hierarchical  position  is  maintained  by  subtle 
communication of gestures and postures: a boss may look directly 
at  a  submissive  member  of  the  group  who  will  glance  only 
furtively _ at his  superior,  and  the  boss  may  paw  the  floor  and 
threaten  by  opening  his  mouth  or  uttering  a  warning  cry  if 
any low-ranking animal does -not keep a suitable distance.  This 
social  dominance _has  been  abolished  by  stimulation  applied 
for 5 seconds once a minute for one hour to the caudate nucleus 
in the  boss  monkey.  During this  period  the  animal's  facial  ex 
pression  appeared  more  peaceful  both  to  the  investigator  and 
to the other animals, who started -to  circulate freely  around the 
cage without observing their usual respect. They actually ignored 
the boss, crowding around him without fear.  During the stimula 
tion  hour,  the  boss's  territoriality  completely  disappeared,  his 
walking time diminished,  and he performed no  threatening or 
aggressive  acts  against  other  monkeys  in  the  colony.  It  was 
evident  that  this  change  in behavior  had  been  determined  by 
brain stimulation because about ten minutes after ESB  was  dis 
continued,  the  boss  had reasserted  his  authority  and  the  other 
animals  feared  him  as  before.  His  territoriality  was  as  well 
established  as  during  control  periods,  and  he  en joyed  his  cus 
tomary  privileges. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comFigure  22 
Monkey colonies  form  autocratic societies  in  which  the  territoriality  of  the 
boss is  clearly shown. He occupies more than half of the cage  (above). Radio 
stimulption  of  an  inhibitory  area  of  the  brain  (below)  modifies  the  boss's 
facial  expression,  and  the  other  monkeys  crowd  fearlessly  around  the 
former  boss  in  his  own  corner. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com166 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

The old  dream  of an  individual  overpowering  the  strength 
of a dictator by remote control has been fulfilled,  at least in our 
monkey colonies,  by a  combination  of  neurosurgery  and  elec 
tronics, demonstrating the possibility of intraspecies instrumen 
tal  manipulation  of  hierarchical  organization.  As  shown  in 
Figure 23,  a  monkey named Ali, who was  the powerful  and ill 
tempered  chief  of a  colony,  often  expressed  his  hostility  sym 
bolically by bitinghis hand or by threatening other members of 
the group.  Radio stimulation in Ali's  caudate  nucleus  blocked 
his  usual aggressiveness  so  effectively  that  the  animal  could  be 
caught  inside  the  cage  without  danger  or  difficulty.  During 
stimulation he might walk a few steps, but he never attempted to 
attack  another animal.  Then a  lever  was  attached  to  the  cage 
wall,  and  if  it  was  pressed,  it  automatically  triggered  a  five 
seconds' radio stimulation of Ali. From time to time some of the 
submissive monkeys  touched the lever,  which was  located close 
to  the feeding tray,  triggering  the  stimulation of Ali.  A  female 
monkey  named  Elsa  soon  discovered  that  Ali's  aggressiveness 
could be inhibited by pressing  the  lever,  and  when Ali  threat 
ened  her,  it  was  repeatedly  observed  that  Elsa  responded  by 
lever pressing.  Her attitude of looking straight at  the  boss  was 
highly significant because a  submissive monkey would not dare 
to do so, for fear of immediate retaliation. The total number of 
Ali's aggressive acts diminished on the days when the lever was 
available, ·and  although  Elsa  did  not  become  the  dominant 
animal,  she  was  responsible  for  blocking  many  attacks  against 
herself  and  for  maintaining  a  peaceful  coexistence  within  the 
whole colony. 

Appeasement of instinctive aggressiveness has also been dem 
onstrated  in an animal species  which  for  generations  has  been 
bred  to  increase  its  ferocious  behavior:  the  brave  bull. _Some 
races of bulls have  been genetically selected for  their aggressive 
behavior just as  others have  been  bred for  farm  work  or meat 
supply.  Brave  bulls  are  stronger  and  more  agile  than  their 
tamer relatives, and these differences in appearance and behavior 
must be supported  at  the  neurophysiological  level  by  different 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comFigure  23 
Above,  Ali,  the  boss  of  the  colony,  expresses  his  ill  temper  by  biting  his 
own  hand.  Below,  a  submissive  monkey,  Elsa,  has  learned  to  press  a  lever 
which  triggers  radio  stimulation  of  Ali,  inhibiting  his  aggressive  behavior 
(51). 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com168 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

mechanisms of responses. The sight of a person, which is neutral 
for  a  tame  bull, will  trigger  a  deadly attack  in  a  brave  one.  If 
we  could detect  functional  differences  in  the  brains  of  these 
two breeds we could discover some clues about the neurological 
basis of aggression. This was the reason for implanting electrodes 
in  the  brains  of several  bulls.  After surgery,  different  cerebral 
points  were  explored  by  radio  stimulation  while  the  animal 
was  free  in  a  small  farm  ring.  Motor  effects  similar  to  those 
observed  in  cats  and  monkeys  were  evoked,  including  head 
turning, lifting of one leg, and circling. Vocalizations were often 
elicited, and in one experiment to test. the reliability of results, 
a  point was  stimulated  100  times  and  100  consecutive  "moo's" 
were  evoked. 

It was  also repeatedly demonstrated that cerebral stimulation 
produced  inhibition  of aggressive  behavior,  and  a  bull  in  full 
charge could be abruptly stopped,  as  shown  in Figure  24.  The 
result seemed  to  be a  combination of motor effect,  forcing  the 
bull to stop and to turn to one side, plus behavioral inhibition of 
the aggressive drive.  Upon repeated  stimulation,  these  animals 
were  rendered  less  dangerous  than  usual,  and  for  a  period  of 
several  minutes would  tolerate  the presence  of investigators  in 
the ring without launching any attack. 

Maternal behavior is  one of the  instincts  most widely shared 
by mammals, and a  baby rhesus monkey enjoys  the first  months 
of his  life resting in the  arms  of the  mother,  who  spends  most 
of her time hugging, nursing, grooming, and taking care of him. 
If the  pair  are  forcibly  separated,  the  mother  becomes  very 
disturbed  and  expresses  her  anxiety  by  prowling  about  rest 
lessly,  threatening  observers,  and  calling  to  her  baby  with  a 
special  cooing sound.  It is  promptly  reciprocated  by  the  little 
one,  who  is  also  extremely anxious  to  return  to  the  protective 
maternal embrace.  This strong bond can  be  inhibited  by  ESB, 
as  demonstrated  in one of our colonies, consisting of  Rose  and 
Olga  with  their  respective  babies,  Roo  and  Ole,  plus  a  male 
monkey.  Maternal  affection  was  expressed  as  usual  without 
being handicapped  by  the  presence  of electrodes  implanted  in 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comINHIBITORY  EFFECTS  IN  ANIMALS  AND  MAN 

169 

both  females  (Figure  25).  Several  simple  motor  effects  evoked 
by  ESB  (such  as  head  turning  or  flexion  of the  arm)  did  not 
disrupt  mother-infant  relations,  but  when  a  10-second  radio 
stimulation was applied to the mesencephalon of Rose, an aggres 
sive  attitude  was  evol<.ed  with  rapid  circling  around  the  cage 
and self-biting .of the hand,  leg,  or flank.  For  the next eight to 
ten  minutes,  maternal  instinct  was  disrupted,  and  Rose  com 
pletely lost  interest  in  her  baby,  ignoring his  tender  calls  and 
rejecting his attempts to approach her.  Little Roo looked rather 
disoriented  and  sought  refuge  . and  warmth.  with  the  other 
mother,  Olga,  who  accepted  both  babies  without  hesitation. 
About  ten minutes  after  ESB,  Rose  regained .her  natural  ma 
ternal behavior andaccepted Rooinber anus. 'J'bis experirnent 
was  repeated  several  times  on  different  days  with  similar . dis 
ruptive  results  for  the  mother-infant  relation..  It should  be 
concluded,  therefore, . that  maternal  behavior is  somehow  de 
pendent on the proper functioning of mesencephalic structures 
and  that  short  ESB applied  in  this  area· is  able  to  block  the 
maternal instinct for a  period . of several minutes. 

Information  about  inhibitory  effect$  induced  by  electrical 
stimulation  of  the . human  brain is  more ..  limited  than  our 
knowledge  about  inhibition in animals;  The subject  has  great 
importance, however, because one of the primary aims of human 
therapy is to inhibit undesirable sensations or excessive neuronal 
activities. Some patients experience a  type of "intractable pain" 
which  cannot  be  alleviated  by  the us1,1al am:.lgesic drugs,  and 
their unbearable suffering could be blockeg by direCt interven 
tion  in brain  structures  where sensations  reach  the perceptual 
level  of consciousness.  Illnesses such as  Park,ins()n's  disease  and 
chorea are characterized -by continuous invoh.mtary movements 
maintained  by  neurmial · dis<;harges  originating  in  specific 
cerebral structures whichcould be inhibited by suitable therapy. 
Assaultive  behavior  constitut(!s  one  of  the  most  disturbing 
symptoms of a group of mental illnesses and is probably related 
to  the abnormal  reactivity of limbic  and reticular areas  of the 
brain.  Epilepsy  is  caused  by  explosive  bursts  of electrical  dis-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comhttp:/www.propheticexplorer.comFigure  24 
Brave  bulls  are  dangerous  animals  which  will  attack  any  intruder  into 
the  arena.  The  animal  in  full  charge  can  be  abruptly  stopped  (above)  by 
radio stimulation  of  the  brain. After several  stimulations,  there  is  a  lasting 
inhibition  of  aggressive  behavior. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comFigure 25 
Above,  maternal  behavior  is  tenderly  expressed  by  both  mother  monkeys, 
Rose  and  Olga,  who  hug,  groom,  and  nurse  their  babies,  Roo  and  Ole. 
Below,  radio  stimulation  of  Rose  for  ten  seconds  in  the  mesencephalon 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comINHIBITORY  EFFECTS  IN  ANIMALS  AND  MAN 

173 

evoked  a  rage  response  expressed  by  self-biting  and  abandoning  her  baby, 
Roo.  For  the  next  ten  minutes  Rose  has  lost  all  her  maternal  interest 
(above),  ignoring  the  appealing  calls  of  Roo  who  seeks  refuge  with  the 
other mother.  Below,  Rose  is  sucking  her foot  and  still  ignoring  her  baby. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF THE  MIND 

174 
charges  which  might  be  inhibited  at  their  original  source. 
Anxiety poses  very difficult  therapeutic  problems,  and  its  basic 
mechanism might be traced to the increased reactivity of specific 
areas of the brain.  All  these disturbances could be cured, or at 
least diminished, if we had a  better knowledge of their anatom 
ical  and  functional  bases  and  could  inhibit  the  activity  of 
neurons responsible for the phenomena. 

In  the  near  future,  important  advances  may  be  expected  in 
this field,  and already we have some initial clinical information 
demonstrating  that  ESB  can  induce  inhibitory  effects  in  man. 
For example,  ESB  applied  to  the  supplementary  motor  cortex 
has slowed down or completely arrested voluntary motor activity 
without  producing  pain  or  any  concomitant  loss  of  conscious 
ness  (174).  In  other  cases,  stimulation  of  the  frontotemporal 
region has  caused an "arrest response"  characterized  by sudden 
cessation  of  voluntary  movements  which  may  be  followed  by 
confusion,  inappropriate  or garbled  speech,  and  overt  changes 
of mood ( 128,  186).  More interesting from  the therapeutic point 
of view is  the fact  that abnormal hyperkinetic  movements  have 
been  inhibited  for  the  duration  of  the  applied  ESB,  allowing 
patients to perform skilled acts which were otherwise impossible. 
In these cases, a small portable instrument could perhaps be used 
by  the  patient  to  stimulate  his  own  brain  in  order  to  inhibit 
abnormal motility temporarily and restore useful skills (16o). 

Somnolence  with  inexpressive  faces,  tendency  to  lower  the 
eyelids,  and  spontaneous  complaint  of  sleepiness,  but  without 
impairment  of  consciousness,  has  been  produced  in  some 
patients by  stimulation of the  fornix  and  thalamus  (7,  199).  In 
some  cases,  sleep  with  pleasant  dreams  has  been  induced,  and 
occasionally  sleep  or  awakening  could  be  obtained  from  the 
same cerebral point by using a slow or high frequency of stimula 
tion  (g6,  229).  Diminished  awareness,  lack  of  normal  insight, 
and impairment of ability to think have been observed by several 
investigators during excitation of different  points of the limbic 
system (74,  120). Often the patients performed automatisms such 
as  undressing or fumbling,  without remembering the  incidents 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comINHIBITORY  EFFECTS  IN  ANIMALS  AND  MAN 

17 5 
afterward.  Some  of our patients said  they  felt  as  if their minds 
were blank or as  if they had  been drinking a  lot of beer. These 
results  indicate  that  consciousness  may  be  related  to  specific 
mechanisms located in determined areas of the brain. They con 
trast with the full  awareness  preserved  when  other areas  of  the 
brain were stimulated. 

Arrest of speech has been most common of all inhibitory effects 
observed  dming electrical  stimulation  of  the human brain  (8), 
and this fact  is  probably due  to  the extensive repreSentation  of 
the  speech  areas  in  the  temporal  lobe,  and also  to  the  facility 
of  exploring  verbal  expression  just  by  conversing  with  the 
patients.  The  most  typical  effect  is  cessation  of  counting.  For 
example, one of our female patients was asked to count numbers, 
starting from one. When she had counted to fo1uteen,  ESB  was 
applied,  and  speech  was 
immediately  interrupted,  without 
changes in respiration or in facial  expression,  and without pro 
ducing fear  or anxiety.  When stimulation  ceased  seconds  later, 
the  patient  immediately  resumed  counting.  She  said  that  she 
did not know why she had stopped;  although she had heard the 
interviewer encouraging her to continue, she had been unable to 
speak. If the same stimulation was applied while the patient was 
silent,  no  effect  could  be  detected  by  the  observer  or  by  the 
patient  herself.  In other cases,  patients  have  been  able  to  read 
and comprehend or to write messages that they were temporarily 
unable to verbalize (200). 

It is  known  that  ESB  activation  of  pleasurable  areas  of  the 
brain  can  inhibit  pain  perception  in  animals  (42,  146),  and 
similar results have also been reported in man, with an immedi 
ate relief of pain  following  septal  stimulation  (98).  Because  of 
the  multiplicity  of  pathways  in  the  nervous  system  which  can 
transmit  disagreeable  sensations,  it  is  often  not  possible  to 
block  all  of them,  and  to alleviate unbeara.ble suffering it  may 
be  easier  to  inhibit  the  cerebral  structures  involved  in  the 
psychological  evaluation  of  pain,  blocking  the  components  of 
anxiety and diminishing the subjective sensation of unpleasant 
ness. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

There are also a few reports indicating that abnormal violence 
may  be reduced  by  ESB:  Heath  has  a  movie showing a  patient 
who  self-stimulated  his  own  brain  in  order  to  suppress  an  ag 
gressive mood as  it developed,  and we  have described a  case  in 
whom  crises  of  antisocial  conduct  during  which  the  patient 
attacked  members  of  his  own  family  were  considerably  dimin 
ished by repeated stimulations of the amygdaloid nucleus  (6o). 
We are only at the beginning of our experimental understand 
ing  of  the  inhibitory  mechanisms  of  behavior  in  animals  and 
man,  but  their  existence  has  already  been  well  substantiated. 
It is clear that manifestations as important as aggressive responses 
depend  not  only  on  environmental  circumstances  but  also  on 
their  interpretation  by  the  central  nervous  system  where  they 
can  be  enhanced  or  totally  inhibited  by  manipulating  the  re 
activity of specific  intracerebral  structures. 

Violence,  including  its  extreme  manifestation  of  war,  is  de 
termined by a  variety of economic  and  ideological  factors;  but 
we must realize that the elite who make the decisions, and even 
the  individual  who  obeys  orders  and  holds  a  rifle,  require  for 
their  behavioral  performance  the  existence  of a  series  of intra 
cerebral  electrical  signals  which  could  be  inhibited  by  other 
conflicting signals  generating  in  areas  such  as  the  caudate  nu 
cleus.  Inhibitory areas of the central  nervous  system  can  be ac 
tivated by  electrical  stimulation as  well  as  by  the  physiological 
impact  of sensory  inputs  which  carry messages,  ideas,  and  pat 
terned  behavior.  Reception  of  information  from  the  environ 
ment  causes  electrical  and  chemical  changes  in  the  brain 
substance,  and  the  stimuli  shape  the  functional  characteristics 
of individual  interpretation  and  integration,  determining  the 
degree  and  quality  of  his  reactions.  Human  relations  are  not 
going  to  be  governed  by  electrodes,  but  they  could  be  better 
understood if we considered not only environmental factors  but 
also  the  intracerebral  mechanisms  responsible  for  their  recep 
tion and elaboration. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPart IV 

EV ALUATIO:N· OF 
ELECTRICAL  ;·CONTROL 
OF  TIIE·BRAIN 

. 

. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comBecause  the  brain  controls  the  whole  body  and  all  mental 
activities, ESB could possibly become a master control of human 
behavior  by  means  of  man-made  plans  and  instruments.  In 
previous  sections  we  have  described  methodology  for  brain 
stimulation and many effects  evoked  by ESB.  This section  will 
discuss  the meaning of these  results,  the  mechanisms  involved, 
the expected limitations, and the problems facing  investigators. 
How  physiological  or . artificial  is  the  electrical  activation  of 
neurons?  How  predictable?  Who  is  responsible  for  acts  per 
formed  under  ESB-the  stimulated  subject  or  the  scientist? 
Which benefits or risks may be expected in the future?  Can we 
modulate  perception and  expression  by  electrical  means?  Can 
we expect that brain investigation will provide a new conception 
of  the  human  mind?  These  and  other  questions  confront  the 
investigator  while  he  is  sending  radio  messages  to  induce  a 
muscle  to  contract,  a  heart  to  beat faster,  or a  sensation  to  be 
felt.  Evaluation  of  these  experiments  requires  the  formulation 
of appropriate  theoretical  concepts  and  the  design  of  working 
hypotheses. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comBrain  Stimulation Triggers  Physiological 

Mechanisms 

Electrical  stimulation of  the  brain  is  in  reality  a  rather  crude 
technique based on the delivery of a monotonous train of pulses 
without  modulation,  without  code,  without  specific  meaning, 
and without feedback  to the pool of neurons which by chance is 
located  within  the  artificial  electrical  field  created  by  stimula 
tion. Temporal and spatial characteristics and the complexity of 
multisynaptic relays, delays,  and convergent and divergent cor 
relations  are also  absent.  The  intensity  of several  volts  usually 
employed in ESB  is  hundreds of times higher than spontaneous 
neuronal  potentials,  which  are  measured  in  millivolts. 

It is  reasonable,  therefore,  that  doubts  have  been  expressed 
about the normality of responses obtained by brain stimulation. 
It  is  difficult  to  compare  normal  behavior  with  electrically 
evoked  effects,  considering  the  complications  of  operative 
trauma,  artificiality  of  experimental  conditions,  and  lack  of 
specificity of ESB  (4).  "Electrical stimulus,  unlike physiological 
excitation,  unselectively affects  all  elements of a  similar thresh 
old that lie within the radius of action of the electrodes"  (107), 
and  in  the  majority of cases  cortical  stimulation  "has  failed  to 
elicit  anything  but  fragments  of  skilled  movements"  (224). 
Cobb  (33)  considers  the  greatest  oversimplification  the  belief 
"among  those  not  educated  in  physiology,  that  the  electrical 
stimulation of a  nerve or brain center closely resembles normal 

18o 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comBRAIN  STIMULATION  TRIGGERS  MECHANISMS 

181 

neuronal  stimulation.  Electrical  stimulation,  however,  pro 
duces  little  that  resembles  the  normal." 

It is  certainly  true  that  many  responses  evoked  by  ESB  are 
simple contractions of a small group of muscles without coordi 
nation,  skill,  or apparent  purpose,  and  that  many  effects  have 
abnormal  characteristics  far  removed  from  the  harmonious 
elegance  of  voluntary  activities.  It  is  also  true,  however,  that 
with  the development  of  technology  to  stimulate  the  brain  in 
free  subjects,  many of  the  responses  obtained  in  both  animals 
and man are  indistinguishable  from  spontaneous  behavior.  Se 
quential  behavior,  sexual  activity,  alimentary  responses,  walk 
ing,  yawning,  fighting,  and  many  other  effects  documented  in 
previous sections  demonstrate conclusively  that ESB  can  evoke 
purposeful,  well-coordinated,  skillful  activities  of  great  re· 
finement and complexity. Patients have accepted evoked psycho 
logical  changes,  such  as  an  increase  in  friendliness,  as  natural 
manifestations . of  their  own  personality  and  not  as  artificial 
results of the  tests.  The question  to answer  is  not whether  but 
how  the  application  of  a  crude  train  of  messageless  electricity 
may result in  the  performance of a  highly refined  and compli 
cated response. 

To explain this apparent contradiction we must consider  the 
normal  mechanisms  of  physiological  performance.  In a  simple 
act such as  the flexion  of a  limb,  the  nerve  impulse  initiates  a 
very  complex  process  which  includes  well-organized,  sequen 
tial,  metabolic  activities  and  structural  changes  in  the  myo 
proteins  resulting  in  the  shortening  of  muscle  fibers.  These 
processes  do  not  depend  on  neural  impulses  and  have  been 
established  by  genetic  determination  as  intrinsic  properties 
of  muscular  tissue  unfolding  in  a  similar  way  under  nervous 
command  or  direct  electrical  excitation.  Electricity  does  not 
create  muscle  contraction;  it simply  activates  a  pre-established 
pattern  of  response.  At ~the  neurological  level,  flexion  of  a 
limb requires the propagation of many well-organized  impulses 
from the brain to the different groups of muscles, the processing 
of  proprioceptive  information  from  many  regions,  the  adjust-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

ments of servomechanisms, visceral adaptations, and many other 
electrical,  thermal,  chemical,  mechanical,  and  physiological 
pre-established  phenomena  and  correlations.  The applied  elec 
tricity  is  only  the  depolarizing  trigger  of  a  group  of  neurons; 
it  starts  processes  which  once  activated  are  relatively  inde 
pendent  of  the  initial  cause.  Evoked  behavior  is  like  a  chain 
reaction  in  which  the  final  result  depends  more  on  the  struc 
ture  and  organization  of  the  components  than  on  the  trigger. 
To  understand  the  role  of electrical  stimulation,  we  may  ask 
whether  the  finger  of  the  person  pushing  a  button  to  launch 
a man into orbit is  responsible for the performance of the com 
plicated machinery or for the sequence of events.  Obviously the 
finger,  like  a  simple  electrical  stimulus,  is  only  the  trigger  of 
a  programed  series  of  interdependent  events  and  cannot  be 
accepted as  the real cause of capsules orbiting around the earth. 
A  tentative explanation of some of the mechanisms  involved 
in motor activities has been proposed in the theory of fragmental 
representation of behavior  (53)  which  postulates  that  behavior 
is  organized as  fragments which have anatomical and functional 
reality  within  the  brain,  where  they  can  be  the  subject  of  ex 
perimental analysis.  The different fragments  may be  combined 
in different sequences like the notes of a  melody,  resulting in a 
succession  of  motor  acts  which  constitute  specific  behavioral 
categories  such  as  licking,  climbing,  or  walking.  The  theory 
may  perhaps be clarified  with one example.  If I  wish  to  take  a 
cookie from the table, this wish may be considered a force called 
"the starter"  because it will determine  the initiation of a  series 
of  motor  acts.  The  starter  includes  drives,  motivations,  emo 
tional  perceptions,  memories,  and other  processes.  To  take  the 
cookie  it  is  necessary  to  organize  a  motor  plan,  a  p!echanical 
strategy, and to decide among several motor choices, because the 
cookie  may  be  taken  with  the  left  or right hand,  directly  with 
the  mouth,  or even  by  using  the  feet  if  one  has  simian  skills. 
Choice,  strategies,  motor  planning,  and  adjustments  depend 
on a set of cerebral structures, " the organizer," which is  different 
from  the  set  employed  by  the  starter,  because  the  desire  for 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comBRAIN  STIMULATION  TRIGGERS  MECHANISMS 

183 

cookies  may  exist  in  hungry  people  or  in completely  paralyzed 
patients, and the hands can move and reach the table for many 
different reasons even if there are no cookies.  Finally, the actual 
contraction  of  muscles  for  the  performance  of  the  selected 
movement  to  reach  the  cookie-for  example,  using  the  right 
hand-depends  on  a  cerebral  set,  "the  performer,"  different 
from  the  previous  two,  because  motor representation of hands, 
mouth,  and feet  is  situated  in  different  areas  of the brain,  and 
the choice  of muscle  group  to  be activated  is  under  the  super 
vision of a given organizer. Naturally, there is a close correlation 
among these three basic mechanisms,. and also between them and 
other  cerebral  functions.  The  concept  of  a  brain  center  as  a 
visible  anatomical locus  is  unacceptable in modern  physiology, 
but  the  participation  of  a  constellation  of  neuronal  groups 
(a  functional  set)  in  a  specific  act  is  more  in  agreement  with 
our  present  knowledge.  The functional  set  may  be  formed  by 
,  the  neurons  of  nuclei  far  from  one  another,  for  instance,  in 
the  cerebellum,  motor  cortex,  pallidum,  thalamus,  and  red 
nucleus,  forming a  circuit in close  mutual  dependence,  andre 
sponsible for a determined act such as  picking up a cookie with 
the right hand. 

If we  accept  the  existence  of  anatomical  representation  of 
the  three  functional  sets--starter,  organizer,  and  performer 
it is  logical  that they can be activated by different types  of trig-
. gers,  and that the evoked results will  be related to the previous 
experiences  linked  to  the  set.  The  same  set,  evoking a  similar 
behavioral response,  may be activated by  physiological  stimuli, 
such as sensory perceptions and ideations, or by artificial stimuli, 
such as electrical impulses. When we stimulate the brain through 
implanted electrodes we can, depending on the location of con 
tacts,  activate  the  starter,  the  organizer,  or· the  performer  of 
different  behavioral  reactions,  so  that  natural  and  artificial 
stimuli  may  interplay  with  one  another,  as  has  been  experi 
mentally demonstrated. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com18 

Electrical Activation of the  "Will" 

The  theoretical  considerations  of  the  previous  section  may 
facilitate  the  understanding  of so-called  willful,  free,  or  spon 
taneous behavior which to a  gTeat  extent depends on pre-estab 
lished  mechanisms,  some  of  them  inborn  and others  acquired  :. 
through learning. When a  child takes his first  steps or when an 
adult learns a  new skill  like  tennis or typing,  the  initial  move 
ments are clumsy and require considerable attention and effort 
in every  detail.  Coordination  progTessively  improves,  unneces 
sary muscular tension  diminishes;  and  the  movements  proceed 
with  speed,  economy,  and  elegance  without  being  thought 
about. Acquisition of a skill means the automation of patterns of 
response  with  the  establishment  of  spatial  and  temporal  se 
quences.  The voluntary aspects  of willful  activity  are  the  pur 
pose  for it and the initiation of performance, while most of the 
details of . complex movements  and adaptation  to  changing cir 
cumstances  are  performed  automatically.  We  may  consider 
that the role of the will is mainly to trigger previously established 
mechanisms. Obviously the will is  not responsible for  the chem 
istry of muscular contraction,  the  electrical  processes  of  neural 
transmission,  or the  intimate  organization  of  responses.  These 
phenomena depend on spindle discharges,  cerebellar activation, 
synaptic  junctions,  reciprocal  inhibitions,  and  many  other 
mechanisms  which  are  not only beyond consciousness  but may 
be  beyond  our  present  knowledge  and  comprehension.  The 
uniqueness of voluntary  behavior  lies  in  its  initial  dependence 

184 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comELECTRICAL  ACTIVATION  OF  THE  "WILL" 

185 

on the integration of a vast number of personal past experiences 
and present receptions. 

Volition  itself  must  be related  to  neuronal  activities,  and  it 
may be asked whether either appropriate sensory perceptions or 
artificial  electrical  stimulation  could  induce  neuronal  pools 
involved  in  decision-making  to  discharge  in  a  like  manner.  I 
shall not enter into the controversial  issues  of causality and de 
termination of free  behavior,  but on the  basis of experimental 
findings  it is  reasonable  to  assume  that voluntary and electrical 
triggering can activate existing cerebral mechanisms in a similar 
way.  If spontaneous  and  electrically  evoked  behavior  involve 
participation of the same  set  of cerebral  areas,  then  both  types 
of behavior should be able to interact by modifying each others' 
inhibitory  and  excitatory  influences.  This possibility  has  been 
proved  experimentally. 

As  described by  Hess  (107)  and  as  observed  also  in  our  ex 
periments,  excitation of some  points in the subthalamus  of  the 
cat induces a  clockwise  rotation  of the  head,  and  the  effect  of 
low  intensity and  low  frequency  (8  cycles  per  second)  stimula 
tion can be counteracted by the animal. The head  starts  rotat 
ing  slowly  and  then  is  brought  back  to  normal  position  by  a 
quick  voluntary  jerk,  the  process  repeating several  times  until 
stimulation  ceases.  If the  intensity  of stimulation is  increased, 
the  corrective  movements  disappear  and  rotation  of  the  head 
progresses slowly  but continuously,  followed  by rotation  of the 
body on its longitudinal axis until the cat lies on its back. Then 
with a sudden jerk the animal abruptly completes the turn and 
springs  to  its  feet.  The explanation of these  results  may  be as 
follows:  During the initial part of the evoked head rotation,  its 
abnormal  position  should  produce  normal  proprioceptive  and 
vestibular stimuli,  starting a  reflex  reaction , to  slow  down  and 
counteract  the  electrically  evoked  effect.  As  soon  as  the  cat  is 
on  its  back,  however,  artificial  and  natural  stimuli  work  to 
gether, the first  to continue the turning, and the second to bring 
the  animal  to  its  usual  horizontal  position;  the  summation  of 
these  two  actions  would  explain . the  sudden  jerk.  Interaction 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com186 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

between  evoked  and  spontaneous  activity  has  also  been  ob 
served  during  conditioning  experiments  with  cats  in  which 
the  animals  often  tried  to  suppress  motor movements  induced 
by ESB  (8g). 

A  clear  example of  algebraic  summation  between  voluntary 
and evoked motility was  observed  in one of our cats  with elec 
trodes implanted in the left hidden motor cortex (48).  Electrical 
stimulation induced an extension and raising of the  right fore 
paw  with  proper  postural  adaptation.  Offering  of  fish  to  the 
animal resulted  in a  similar extension  and raising of  the  limb 
in order to seize the food.  Simultaneous presentation of the fish 
and  stimulation  of  the  cortex  produced  a  motor  response  of 
greater  amplitude  than  usual;  the  cat  miscalculated  the  neces 
sary movement and overshot his  target.  He was  unable to catch 
the  food  until he  made a  series  of corrective  adjustments,  and 
then  the  fish  was  successfully  captured  and  eaten.  In  addition 
to  demonstrating  the  interrelation  between  evoked  and  spon 
taneous responses,  this  experiment also  proved  that the animal 
was  aware  of an  artificial  disturbance,  and  after  a  brief  period 
of trial and error was able to correct its performance accordingly. 
In· the  play  of  forces  between  spontaneous  and  evoked  re 
sponses,  which one is  more  powerful? Will one of them be pre 
potent  over  the  other?  Experimental  results  demonstrate  that 
when  there  is  a  conflict  in  the  response,  the  stronger  stimulus 
dominates.  For  example,  stimulation  of  the  left  sulcus  presyl 
vius with o.6  milliamperes in a  cat named Nero caused a  small 
flexion  of  the  right  foreleg.  When  Nero  was  jumping  from  a 
table  to the floor,  the same excitation did not produce any visi 
ble  effect,  and  the  animal  landed  with  perfect  coordination, 
showing  good  voluntary  control  of  all  his  limbs.  Electrical 
flexion  of  the  foreleg  had  therefore  been  completely  inhibited 
by  the  peremptory  need  to  use  the  musculature  in  the  jump. 
If stimulation  intensity  was  increased  up  to  1.8  milliamperes, 
flexion  of the  limb appeared even when  Nero  was  air-borne  in 
the middle of a jump, and landing was disrupted by the inability 
to use the right foreleg.  In general,  electrical stimulation of the 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comELECTRICAL  ACTIVATION  OF  THE  "WILL" 

187 

brain  was  dominant  over  voluntary  behavior,  provided  that 
its  intensity was  sufficiently increased. 

It is  known  that  reflexes  are  predictable  responses,  rigidly 
patterned  and  blindly  performed.  Similarly,  electrical  excita 
tion  of a  peripheral  motor  nerve  induces  a  stereotyped  move 
ment  with  little  adaptation  to  external  circumstances.  In  con 
trast,  willful  activity generally  has  a  purpose,  and  its  perform 
ance is  adapted for  the attainment of a  determined aim,  with a 
continuous processing of  proprioceptive  and  exteroceptive sen 
sory  information,  with  the  use  of  feedback  mechanisms,  with 
capacity  for  instantaneous  readjustment  of  the  central  com 
mand  to  adapt  to  changes  in  the  environment,  and  with  pre 
diction of the future which requires spatiotemporal calculation 
of  speed,  direction,  and  strategies  of  moving  targets.  Depend 
ing  on  the  location  of  cerebral  stimulation,  the  responses  ob 
tained  by  ESB  may  either be similar  to  a  blind  reflex  or  have 
all  the  above-mentioned  characteristics  of voluntary  activity. 

Stimulation  of  some  points  in  the  motor  cortex  and  motor 
pathways  in  the  cat,  monkey,  and  other  animals  may  produce 
simple movements, such as  the flexion of a  limb, which are com 
pletely  stereotyped  and  lack  adaptation.  These  effects  may  be 
interpreted  as  the  activation  of  efferent  structures  where  the 
pattern of response  has already  been decided.  At  this  level,  the 
neural  functions  are  of  conduction  rather  than  of  integration 
and  organization,  and  only  minor  variations  are  possible  in 
the circulating impulses,  regardless of whether  their origin  was 
spontaneous  or  artificial.  To  the  contrary,  there  is  plenty  of 
evidence  that  many  of  the  effects  evoked  by  ESB  are  oriented 
toward  the  accomplishment  of  a  specific  aim  with  adaptation 
of  the  motor  performance  to  unexpected  changes  in  environ 
mental  circumstances.  The  following  examples  substantiate 
this statement. 

In  the  cat,  electrical  stimulation  of  the  inferior  part  of  the 
sulcus  presylvius  consistently  induced  licking movements  with 
well-organized  opening  and  closing  of  the  mouth  and  phasic 
protrusion  of  the  tongue.  Under  anesthesia,  the  licking  was 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com188 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

automatic  and  purposeless;  but  in  the  awake,  free-moving 
animal  the  response was  directed  toward some  useful  purpose, 
and the cat searched for a target to lick-food, the hands of the 
experimenter,  the floor,  or its own fur.  In this case,  motor per 
formance and posture of the whole body adapted to  the experi 
mental setting, and in order to lick  the investigator's  hand,  for 
example, the cat advanced a  few steps and approached the hand 
even if it moved slowly away. Another example of adaptation to 
the  environment is  the  "avoidance of obstacles"  (48).  Stimula 
tion  of the middle  part of the  presylvian  sulcus  in  the  cat  in 
duced  a  contralateral  turning  of  the  head  in  the  horizontal 
plane.  The  effect  was  reliable,  but  when  the  movement  was 
interrupted  by placing an obstacle  such  as  a  book  in  its  path, 
the  animal  modified  its  performance  and  raised  its  head  to 
avoid  the  interposed  obstacle  before  continuing  the  evoked 
head turning. 

The adaptability of artificially  induced cerebral responses  to 
changes  in  the  environment  has  been  cleaily  demonstrated  by 
rhesus  monkeys' . aggressive  behavior  which  was  selectively 
directed by the animals against their natural enemies within the 
group with a  motor pattern of chasing and  fighting  which  con 
tinuously  changed  according  to  the  unpredictable  strategies 
of those under attack.  In this case,  ESB  evidently did not evoke 
a  predetermined  motor  effect  but  an  emotional  state  of  in 
creased aggressiveness which was served by pre-established motor 
skills  and  directed  according  to  the  previous  history  of  social 
relations  (53). 

Similar  experiments  have  been  performed  in  roosters  ( 111 ) . 
If the bird was alone, motor restlessness was  the only observable 
effect of ESB, while the same stimulation of a rooster in a group 
produced a state of increased aggressiveness and attacks on other 
birds.  Sharp fighting ensued with perfectly coordinated,  typical 
patterns of attack and defense  in the group. 

We may  conclude  that  ESB  can  activate  and  influence  some 
of  the  cerebral  mechanisms  involved  in  willful  behavior.  In 
this  way  we  are  able  to  investigate  the  neuronal  functions  re-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comELECTRICAL  ACTIVATION  OF  THE  "WILL" 

189 

lated  to  the  so-called  will,  and  in  the  near  future  this  experi 
mental  approach  should  permit  clarification  of  such  highly 
controversial subjects as  "freedom," "individuality," and "spon 
taneity"  in  factual  terms  rather  than  in  elusive  semantic  dis 
cussions.  The  possibility  of  influencing  willful  activities  by 
electrical means has obvious ethical implications, which will  be 
discussed  later. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comCharacteristics  and Limitations 

of Brain  Control 

The possibility of man's controlling the thoughts of other men 
has ranked as  high in human fantasy  as  the control  over  trans 
mutation  of  metals,  the  possession  of  wings,  or  the  power  to 
take a  trip  to  the  moon.  Our generation  has  witnessed  the  ac 
complishment of so many nearly impossible  tasks  that today we 
are  ready  to  accept  almost  anything.  In  the  world  of  science, 
however,  speculation and fantasy  cannot replace truth. 

There  is  already abundant evidence  that  ESB  can  control  a 
wide range of functions,  including motor activities  and mental 
manifestations, in animals and in man. We know that by electri 
cal  stimulation  of  specific  cerebral  structures  we  can  make  a 
person  friendlier  or  influence  his  train  of  thought.  In spite  of 
its spectacular potential;  ESB  has  practical and theoretical  limi 
tations which should be delineated. 

Predictability 

When we  get into a  car and press  the starter,  the  motor  will 
almost certainly begin to run in a few  seconds.  The brain,  how 
ever, does not have the simplicity of a machine. When electrodes 
are  introduced  into a  cerebral  structure  and stimulation  is  ap 
plied  for  the  first  time,  we  really  cannot  predict  the  quality, 
localization,  or intensity of  the  evok~d effects.  We do  not even 

190 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comCHARACTERISTICS  AND  LIMITATIONS  OF  BRAIN  CONTROL 

191 

know  that  a  response  will  appear.  This  is  especially  true  for 
complex  structures,  like  the  amygdaloid  region,  which  have 
great functional multiplicity;  but it is  also  the case in relatively 
simple  areas  like  the  motor  cortex.  The  anatomical  and  func 
tional  variability of the  brain  are  factors  which  hinder  predic 
tion of ESB results (53). The importance of these limiting factors 
is  compounded  by  alterations  in  regional  activity  related  to 
changes  in  local,  general,  and  environmental  circumstances. 
We  know  that  certain  functions  are  represented  in  specific 
cerebral  structures,  but  the  precise  location  of a  desired  target 
requires  careful  exploration,  and  implantation  of  only  a  few 
contacts  may  be  rather  disappointing.  After  repeated  explora 
tions of a  selected area in several subjects,  predictability of  the 
observed responses  in  that area for  that species  can be  assessed 
with  a  higher degree  of confidence.  Present  information  about 
functional mapping in most cerebral areas  is  still rather incom 
plete. 

Functional  Monoton'V 
' 

Electrical  stimulation is  a  nonspecific  stimulus which  always 
activates  a  group  of neurons  in a  similar  way  because  there  is 
no coded neural message  or feedback carried to the stimulating 
source. The responses,  therefore,  are repeated · in a  monotonous 
way,  and any variability is  rela~ed to changes  in the stimulated 
subject.  This  functional  monotomy  rules  out  the  possibility 
that  an  investigator  could  direct  a  subject  toward  a  target  or 
induce  him,  like  a  robot,  to  perform  any  complex  task  under 
remote-controlled  orders. 

Science  fiction  has  already  imagined men  with  intracerebral 
electrodes  engaged  in all  kinds  of mischief  under  the  perverse 
guidance of radio waves sent by some evil scientist. The inherent 
limitations of ESB  make realization of this fantasy very remote. 
The flexion of a limb can be radio controlled and an emotional 
state could also  be set remotely,  but the sequences of responses 
and adaptation to the environment depend on established intra-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

cerebral  mechanisms  whose  complexity  cannot  be  duplicated 
by ESB.  Even if we could stimulate different points of the brain 
through twenty or thirty channels, it would be necessary to have 
sensory  feedback  and  computerized  calculations  for  the  pro 
graming of simple spatiotemporal sequences.  Induced  perform 
ance of more complex acts would be far beyond available meth 
odology. It should be clarified that I  am talking about directing 
each phase of a  response, and not about complex behavior such 
as  lever  pressing  or  fighting,  which  may  be  triggered  by  ESB 
but develops according to individual experiential circumstances 
which  are beyond electrical  control. 

Skillful  Performance 

Many of the activities  elicited by  ESB  certainly can  be cate 
gorized  as  skillful.  Pressing  a  lever,  climbing a  cage  wall,  and 
looking for  a  fight  require  good  motor  coordination  and  suit 
able  processing  of  information.  Walking  on  two  feet,  which 
has  been  repeatedly  elicited  in monkeys  during  stimulation  of 
the red nucleus  (Figure  12),  is  another  example  of refined  co 
ordination and equilibrium seldom observed in spontaneous be 
havior. 

These  facts  demonstrate  that  ESB  may  result  in  different 
types  of skillful  performance,  but it must  be  understood  that 
these  responses  represent  the  manifestation  of  skills  already 
familiar to the subject. Motor learning requires the reception of 
sensory inputs not only from the environment but also from  the 
performing muscles,  and  a  relatively  lengthy  process  of  motor 
training  is  required  to  perfect  reactions  related  to  each  type 
of  performance  and  to  store  the  appropriate  ideokinetic  for 
mulas  in  the  brain  for  future  reference  and  use.  Much  of  the 
brain participates in learning, and a monotonous train of pulses 
applied  to  a  limited  pool  of  neurons  cannot  be  expected  to 
mimic its complexity. The acquisition of a new skill is  theoreti 
cally and practically beyond  the  possibilities of electrical stimu-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comCHARACTERISTICS  AND  LIMITATIONS  OF  BRAIN  CONTROL 

193 

lation,  but  ESB  can  create  the  desire  to  perform  certain  acts 
which  may  be skillful. 

Individual  Stability 

Personal  identity  and  reactivity  depend  on  a  large  number 
of factors  accumulated through many years  of experience  inter 
acting  with  genetic  trends  within  the  complexity  of  neuronal 
networks.  Language  and  culture  are  among  the  essential  ele 
ments  of  individual  structure.  All  these  elements  cannot  be 
substituted for  by the delivery of electricity to the brain.  Mem 
ories  can  be  recalled,  emotions  awakened,  and  conversations 
speeded  up by ESB,  but  the  patients always  express  themselves 
according  to  their background and experience.  It is  possible  to 
disturb  consciousness,  to  confuse  sensory interpretations,  or  to 
elicit  hallucinations  during  excitation  of  the  brain.  It is  also 
possible  to induce fear, · pleasure, and changes  in aggressive  be 
havior,  but  these  responses  do  not  represent  the  creation  of  a 
new  personality-only  a  change  in  emotionality  or  reactivity 
with  the  appearance  of  manifestations  closely  related  to  the 
previous  history  of  the  subject. 

ESB  cannot  substitute  one  personality  for  another  because 
electricity  cannot  replicate  or  influence  all  the  innumerable 
factors  which  integrate  individual  identity.  Contrary  to  the 
stories  of  science  fiction  writers,  we  cannot  modify  political 
ideology,  past history, or national loyalties by electrical  tickling 
of  some  secret  areas  of  the  brain.  A  complete  change  in  per 
sonality  is  beyond  the  theoretical  and  practical  potential  of 
ESB,  although  limited  modification  of  a  determined  aspect  of 
personal reactions is  possible.  In spite of important limitations, 
we are certainly facing basic ethical  problems about when, why, 
and  how  some  of  these  changes  are acceptable,  and  especially 
about who  will  have  the responsibility  of influencing  the cere 
bral activities of other human beings. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com194 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

Technical  Complexity 

Electrical stimulation of the central  nervous  system  requires 
careful  planning,  complex  methodology,  and  the  skillful  col 
laboration  of  specialists  with  knowledge  and  experience  in 
anatomy,  neurophysiology,  and  psychology.  Several  prerequi 
sites,  including  construction  of  the  delicate  multilead  elec 
trodes  and  refined  facilities  for  stereotaxic  neurosurgery,  are 
necessary.  The  selection  of  neuronal  targets  and  appropriate 
parameters  of  stimulation  require  further  sophistication  and 
knowledge  of  functional  brain  mapping  as  well  as  electronic 
technology.  In  addition,  medical  and  psychiatric  experience 
is  necessary  in  order  to  take  care  of  the  patient,  to  interpret 
the  results  obtained,  and  to  plan  the  delivery  of  stimulations. 
These elaborate requirements  limit  the  clinical  application  of 
intracerebral  electrodes  which  like  other  modern  medical  in 
terventions  depends  on  team  work,  equipment,  and  facilities 
available  in only a  few  medical  centers.  At  the  same  time,  the 
procedure's  complexity  acts  as  a  safeguard  against  the  possible 
improper use of ESB  by untrained or unethical persons. 

Functions  Beyond the  Control  of ESB 

We are in the initial steps of a  new  technology,  and  while  it 
is  difficult  to  predict  the  limits  of unknown  territory,  we  may 
suppose  .that  cerebral  manifestations  which  depend  on  the 
elaboration  of  complex  information  will  elude  electrical  con 
trol.  For example, reading a  book or listening to a  conversation 
involves reception of many  messages which cannot be mimicked 
by ESB.  A  pattern of behavior which is  not in the brain cannQt 
be organized or invented  under  electrical  control.  ESB  cannot 
be  used  as  a  teaching  tool  because  skills  such  as  playing  the 
piano, speaking a  language,  or solving a  problem  require  com 
plex  sensory  inputs.  Sequential  behavior  or  even  elemental 
motor responses  cannot be synthetized  by  cerebral  stimulation, 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comCHARACTERISTICS  AND  LIMITATIONS  OF  BRAIN  CONTROL 

195 

although they are easily evoked if they have already been estab 
lished in the excited area as  ideokinetic formulas.  Since  electri 
cal stimulation does not carry specific  thoughts it is  not feasible 
as a tec-hnique to implant ideas or direct behavioral performance 
in  a  specific  context.  Because  of  its  lack  of symbolic  meaning, 
electricity  could  not  induce  effects  comparable  to  some  post 
hypnotic  performances. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com20 

Medical  Applications 

The discovery of . new  therapies  has  been-and still  is-a more 
pressing  need  "in  cerebral  disorders  than  in  other  fields  of 
medicine  because  of their greater consequences  for  the  mental 
and somatic  well-being of patients.  Unfortunately,  advances  in 
this area have been relatively slow, partly because of the intrinsic 
complexity  of the  problems  involved,  and  partly  because  of  a 
traditional  fear  and reluctance  to disturb  or deal  directly with 
the  material  substratum of mental  activities.  At  the  beginning 
of the century,  the  public was  generally  hostile  to  surgery and 
considered  it almost  obscene  for  a  surgeon  to  look  into  the 
most  intimate  depths  of  the  body  (185).  With  cultural  and 
scientific  advances  this  prejudice  has  slowly  receded,  and  the 
study of the human body is  now recognized  as  essential  for  the 
advance of medicine.  Sexual  taboos  have  diminished,  and  even 
the  scientific  investigation · of  the  phases  and  details  of  human 
intercourse  has  at  last  been  undertaken.  All  of  the  organs  of 
the  body,  including  the  heart,  genitals,  and  brain,  have  been 
accepted  as  suitable subjects  for  research. 

Implantation  of  electrodes  inside  the  human  brain  is  like 
installing  a  magic  window  to  reveal  the  bursts  of  cellular  dis 
charges during functional  activation of specific  structures.  The 
meaning of these  bursts is  often difficult  to  decipher,  but some 
correlations  between  electrical  patterns  and  behavioral  effects 
have  already  been  firmly  established.  The  electrical  line  of 
communication  has  also  been  used  to  send  simple  messages  to 

196 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comMEDICAL  APPLICATIONS 

197 
the  depth  of  the  brain  in order  to  arouse .dormant  functions 
or  to  appease  excessive  neuronal , firing.  A  new  methOd  was  . 
thus found to impose therapeutic order upon disorderly activity. 
In  spite  of  the  tremendous  potential  offered  by  the  direct 
access  to the brain, medical applications were received with sus, 
picion  and strong criticism  and have. progressed  rather  slowly. 
The  growir1g  acceptance  of  even  experimental  surgical  inter 
ventions in most organs including the human heart is  in sharp 
contrast  with  the  generally  cold  reception  to  the _implantation 
of wires  in  the  human  brain,  even  though  this . procedure  has 
been used -in animals ._for forty  years and has  proved to  be safe. 
The reasons  are  to  a  great  extent related  to  the  persistence  of 
old · taboos,  in  scientists  as  well  as  in laymen,  and  to  the  more 
logical  fear of opening some Pandora's box. 

As experience overcomes opp(>sition, cerebralexplorations are 
being  extended  to  different  hospitals  around  the  world,  'as 
shown by several recent symposia (159,  182, 216). 

Diagnosis 

The  spontaneous  electrical  activity  of  the  brain  ( electroen 
cephalogram  or  EEG)  can  be  recorded  by  means  of  surface 
electrodes  attached  by  conductive  paste  to  the  outside  of  the 
scalp. This is a standard procedul'e used for diagnostic  purposes 
in several cerebral illnesses, sqch as ·epilepsy,  which is character 
ized  by episodes of increased amplitude and synchronization of 
neuronal acth:ity which can be recorded and identified.  Strong 
electrical  disturbances  may,  however,  be  present  in  structures. 
located in the  depth of the  brain which cannot be detected  by 
scalp  EEG  (57),  and  in  this  case  .the  use  of  intracerebral  elec 
trodes  may  provide  essential  diagnostic  information.  For  ex 
ample,  psychomotor  epilepsy  has  been:  alleviated  by  surgical 
removal  of  the  tip  of the  temporal lobe where  seizure  activity 
originated,  and  in  these  cases  it  is  imperative  to  identify  the 
source of the fits  and especially to decide whether they are  uni~ 
lateral  or present  on  both  sides · of the  brain.  In spite  of some 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

198 
controversial  problems  about  the  location,  multiplicity,  and 
migration of epileptic foci, there js general agreement that depth 
recordings  through implanted electrodes can give valuable data 
unobtainable by any other means; 

The  expected  correlations  between  scalp  EEG  and  mental 
disturbances have failed to . materialize in experimental studies, 
although  some  mentally  ill  patients  have  exhibited  electrical 
abnormalities.  De.pth  recordings  have  also  failed  to  provide 
decisive  information  about  these  patients,  and  for  example, 
the  suggestion  that  septal  spikes  might  be  typical  of  schiw 
phrenia  (98)  has  notbeen ·confirmed  (57).  The absence  of sig 
nificant  data  must  be attributed  to  the  lack  of  refinement  of 
present  methodology .. Disturbed  functions  must  have  a  back 
ground of altered  neuronal physiology which should be detect 
able if more knowledge  of the mechanisms  involved and  more 
sophisticated  techniques  were  available.  One  step  in  this 
direction  is  the analysis  ofelectrical activity  by means of auto 
correlation  and  cross-correlation  (23)  in  order  tp  recognize 
periodicity of  patterns among the  noise  of other signals.  Com 
puter analysis of power and spectral analysis  of frequencies  are 
also new tools which will increase the future scientific and diag 
nostic usefulness of electrical· recordings. Depth recordings may 
also be used for localization of tumors inside the unopened skull 
to  detect  abnormally slow  potential  shifts  from  the  tissue  sur 
rounding the neoplasm ami the lack of spontaneous waves with 
in the mass of tumoral cells. 

In  addition . to  knowledge  derived  from  the  study  of  spon 
taneous  brain  waves,  other  valuable  information  may  be  ob 
tained  by  recording  the  alterations  evoked  in . intracerebral 
electrical  activity  following  application  of  sensory  stimulation 
or  ESB.  Presentation  of flashes  of light with  a  stroboscope,  or 
of auditory clicks, activates the corresponding cerebral analyzers 
and may  unveil  areas  of excessive  reactivity.  Epileptic  patients 
are  especially  sensitive  to  repeated  flashes  and  may  respond 
with an activation  of dotrnant 'electrical  abnormalities  or even 
with a  convulsive seizure.  Administration of single  or repeated 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comMEDICAL  APPLICATIONS 

199 
electrical shocks may also help in the localization of malfunction 
ing  neuronal  fields.  Systemic  administration  of  drugs  which 
increase or decrease brain excitability (such as  metrazol  or phe 
nobarbital)  can be used  in conjunction with  evoked  potentials 
in  order  to  test  the  specific  pharmacological  sensitivity  of  a 
patient,  thus  orienting  his  medical  or  postsurgical  therapy. 

Electrical  stimulation of  the  brain  during  surgical  interven 
tions,  or  during  therapeutical  destruction  of  limited  cerebral 
areas,  is  necessary  in  order  to  test  local  excitability  and  de 
termine  the  functional  localization  of  areas  which  must  be 
spared.  This is  particularly important during the surgical  treat 
ment of Parkinson's disease, which requires freezing of cerebral 
tissue  around  the  pallidum  or  thalamus,  close  to  motor  path 
ways  in  the internal capsule.  Identification of these  pathways  is 
imperative in order to avoid their accidental destruction and the 
subsequent  permanent  motor  paralysis  of  the  patient. 

Therapy 

The cerebral  tissue around  the  electrode contact may  be de 
stroyed  by  electrocoagulation,  passing  a  suitable  amount  of 
direct  current.  The  main  advantages  of  using  implanted  elec 
trodes  for  this  purpose,  instead of open brain surgery,  are  that 
careful functional explorations are possible before and after the 
brain lesion  is  placed and,  more  importantly,  that  coagulation 
can be controlled and repeated if necessary over a  period of days 
or  weeks,  according  to  the  therapeutic  results  obtained.  The 
procedure has been used for  therapy of involuntary movements, 
intractable  pain,  focal  epilepsy,  and  several  mental  disturb 
ances  including  anxiety,  fear,  compulsive  obsessions,  and  ag- · 
gressive behavior. Some investigators report a remarkable thera 
peutic  success  in  obsessive  patients;  others  are  more  skeptical 
about  the  usefulness  of  depth  electrodes  and  electrocoagula 
tions in treating mental illness. 

Electrical  stimulation of specific  structures  has  been  used  as 
a  therapeutic  procedure,  and  beneficial  effects  have  been  ob-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com200 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

tained  in schizophrenic  patients  by  repeated  excitation  of  the 
septum  and  other  areas  which  produce  pleasurable  sensations 
(gg,  201,  233).  In other cases  of intractable  pain,  considerable 
improvement  has  also  been  reported,  and  some  patients  have 
been allowed to stimulate their own brains repeatedly by means 
of  portable stimulators.  In one  patient,  spontaneous  bursts  of 
aggressive  behavior  were  diminished  by  brief  periods  of  re 
peated stimulation of the amygdaloid nucleus (6o). 

One of the promising medical applications of ESB  is  the pro 
graming of long-term stimulations.  Animal  studies  have  shown 
that  repeated  excitations  of  determined  cerebral  structures 
produced  lasting  effects  and  that  intermittent  stimulations 
could be continued indefinitely.  Some results  in man have  also 
been  confirmatory.  It should  be  emphasized  that  brain  lesions 
represent  an  irreversible  destruction  while  brain  stimulations 
are far more physiological and conservative and do not rule out 
placing  of  lesions  if  necessary.  One  example  may  clarify  the 
potential  of  this  procedure.  Nashold  (16o)  has  described  the 
case of one patient, suffering from very severe  intention tremor 
associated  with multiple  sclerosis,  in  whom  stimulation  of  the 
dentate  nucleus  of  the  cerebellum  produced  an  inhibition  of 
the  tremor  with  mar~ed ipsilateral  improvement  of  voluntary 
motility. The speculation was that a cerebral pacemaker could be 
activated  b_y  the  patient  himself  when  he  desired  to  perform 
voluntary  movements. 

Many other possible applications could be explored including 
the treatment of anorexia nervosa by stimulation of the feeding 
centers  of  the  lateral  hypothalamus,  the  induction  of  sleep  in 
cases  of insomnia by excitation of  the  center  median  or of the 
caudate  nucleus,  the  regulation  of  circulating  ACTH  by  acti 
vation  of  the  posterior  hypothalamus,  and  the  increase  of 
patients'  communication  for  psychotherapeutic  purposes  by 
excitation  of  the  temporal  lobe. 

A  two-way  radio communication system could be established 
between  the  brain  of  a  subject  and  a  computer.  Certain  types 
o£  neuronal  activity  related  to  behavioral  disturbances  such  as 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comMEDICAL  APPLICATIONS 

201 

anxiety,  depression,  or  :rage  could  be  rec()gnized  in  order  to 
trigger  stimulation  of  specific  inhibitory  structures.  The  de- 
livery  of brain ·stimulation on demand  to  correctcerebral  dys 
functions  represents ·a  new  approach to  therapeutic  feedback. 
While  it is  speculative, itis within  the realm  of possibility ac 
cording to  present knowledge and  projected methodology. 

Circumvention of Damaged  Sensory1nputs 

The miracle of giving light to the blind arid sound to the deaf 
has  been  made  possible  by  implantation  of  electrodes,  dem" 
onstrating the  technical possibility  of drcuinventing  damaged 
sensory receptors by direct electfical stii11ulation of the nervous 
system. 

Brindley and Lewin (24)  have described the case of a  52-year 
old woman,  totally  blind after  suffering bilateral  glaucoma,  in 
whoni  an array  of  eighty  small  receiving  c<>ils  were  implanted 
subcutaneously above the -skull,  terminating in ¢ighty platinum 
electrodes encased in a sheet of silicone rubber placed in direct 
contact with the visual  cortex· of the right occipital lobe.  Each 
receiving coil  was  tuned  to  a  f:requency  of 6  or  9:5  megahertz 
and  could  be  activated  by  pressing  a  transmitting coil  against 
the  scalp.  With  this · type  of  transdermal  stimulation;  a  visual 
sensation  was  perceived  by • the  patient  in  the  left  half  of  her 
visual field  as  a very small spot of white light or sometimes as  a 
duplet or a  cluster of points.  The effects  produced  by stimula 
tion of contacts  2 ·4 millimeters apart were· easily distinguished, 
and  simultaneous  excitation  of  several  electrOdes  evoked  the 
perception ofpredictable simple viSual patterns. The investiga 
tors  suppose  that by implanting six  hundred  tiny electrodes  it 
would be possible for  blind patients to discriminate visual  pat 
terns;  they could also achieve  a-normal readingspeed by  using 
eiectrical  signals  £:rom  an  automatic page  scanner. 

Using  a  different  approach;  the  Me}dcan  investigator  del 
Campo (26) has designed an ins_t:ru:ment called an "amaroscope," 
consisting of photoelectric  cells,  to  transform luminous  images 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com202 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

into electrical  impulses  which  are  modulated  and  fed  through 
electrodes  placed over the  skin above  the eyes  to stimulate  the 
supraorbital branches of the trigeminal nerve.  Impulses are thus 
carried to  the reticular system  and the cerebral cortex.  The in 
strument  is  not  too  sophisticated  and  its  neurophysiological 
principles  are  controversial,  but  its  experimental  testing  in 
more  than  1 oo  persons  has  proved  that visual  perceptions  may 
be  electrically  produced  in  blind  patients,  even  in  some  who 
have no eyes  at all. 

Auditory sensations have also been produced in a deaf person 
by  electrical  stimulation  of  the  auditory  nerve  through  per 
manently  implanted electrodes.  Simmons  et al.  (208)  studied  a 
6o-year-old  male  who had been  totally deaf in  his  right ear for 
several  years  and  nearly  deaf  in  the  left  for  several  months. 
Under local anesthesia, a cluster of six electrodes was  implanted 
on  the  right  auditory  nerve  with  a  connector  anchored  to  the 
skull  just  beneath  the  right  ear.  Two  weeks  after  surgery, 
electrical  stimuli  were  able  to  produce  perception  of different 
kinds of auditory sensations.  Pitch varied with the point stimu 
lated and also  depended on  the  electrical  parameters used.  For 
example, 3 to 4  pulses per second were heard as  "clicks,"  10 per 
second  as  "telephone  ringing,"  30  per  second  as  "bee  buzz," 
and  1 oo to 300 per second could not be discriminated.  Loudness 
was  related  to amplitude of stimulation  and  to  pulse  duration, 
and was less affected by its frequency. 

To  evaluate  these  studies  we  must  understand  that  the  re 
finement  of  the  senses  cannot  be  duplicated  by  electronic 
means  because  receptors  are  not  passive  transducers  of  energy 
but active  modulators  and discriminators  of  impulses.  The  re 
ciprocal  feedback  between  peripheral  and  central  neurons  and 
the  processes  of  filtering  and  cross-correlation  of  information 
which  takes  place  during afferent  transmission  of  impulses  are 
absent  in  the  instrumental  reception  of  inputs.  It is  doubtful 
that  refined  perceptions  comparable  to  physiological  ones  can 
be  provided  by  electronic  means,  but  the  perception  of sensa 
tions-even  if  crude-when  hope  had  been  lost  is  certainly 
encouraging and  demands  the  continuation  of  research  efforts. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comMEDICAL  APPLICATIONS 

Brain  Viability 

The clinical distinction  between  life  and  death  was  not  too 
difficult  to  establish  in the past.  When respiration  and palpita 
tions  of  the  heart  had  ceased,  a  person  was  pronounced  dead, 
and  there  was  little  that  a  doctor  could  do.  It  is  true  that  in 
some extraordinary cases  the signs of death were only apparent, 
and a few  patients have revived spontaneously,  creating quite a 
shock  for  their doctors,  relatives,  and  for  themselves,  but  these 
fantastic stories are the very rare exceptions. 

A  new  situation  has  been  created  in  recent  years  because 
medical technology has often taken the determination of human 
death  away  from  natural  causality.  Respiratory  arrest  is  no 
longer fatal,  and many poliomyelitic victims have survived with 
the help of iron lungs;  cardiac block does not necessarily signal 
the end of life because heart beats may be artificially controlled 
by  pacemakers;  kidney  failure  will  not  poison  the  patient  if 
dialysis machines are available to clean his blood.  To the grow· 
ing  collection  of  ingenious  electromechanical  instruments  a 
new methodology has recently been added:· the cross-circulation 
between a  sick  human being and a  healthy baboon  in order to 
clear  the  human  blood.  This  procedure  was  first  tested  in  De 
cember,  1967,  by  Dr.  Hume  at  the  Virginia  Medical  College 
Hospital  to  treat a  woman  patient in  deep  hepatic  coma  with 
jaundice  and  edema.  A  35-pound  baboon  was  anesthetized, 
cooled,  and its  blood completely washed  out with  Ringer solu 
tion and replaced  with human  blood matched  to  the  patient's. 
Then  a  cross-circulation  was  established  from  the  ape's  leg  to 
the  patient's  arm.  In  twelve  hours  the  patient  had  excreted 
about 5 liters of fluid through the baboon's kidney and regained 
consciousness.  Twenty-two  days  later  the  patient  went  home, 
and  the  baboon  was  alive  and  healthy.  A  similar  procedure 
was  successfully  used later in other cases  (21). 

Today  the lives  of many  patients do  not depend completely 
on  the  well-being  of  their  own  organic  functions  but  on  the 
availability  of  apes,  organ  donors,  the  voltage  of  a  battery,  in-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com204 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

tegrity of electronic circuits, proper management of pumps, and 
teamwork of doctors and technicians.  In certain cases death can 
be  delayed  for  weeks  or  months,  and  current  technology  has 
placed  upon  doctors  the  tremendous  responsibility,  the  nearly 
deific  power,  of  deciding  the  duration  of  patients'  survival. 
A  heated  controversy,  reaching  the  public  and  the  British 
Parliament,  was  created  by  the  recent  disclosure  that  in  Lon 
don's  Neasden  Hospital  the  records  of  patients  over  sixty-five 
years of age and suffering from malignant tumors or other serious 
chronic  diseases  were  marked  "NTBR"  ("not  to  be  resusci 
tated") in case of cardiac arrest. Artificial prolongation of human 
life  is  time consuming and  expensive  in  terms  of  instrumenta 
tion and personnel, and it imposes added stress  on  the  patients 
and their families.  Because resources are limited, it is  materially 
impossible  to  attempt  to  resuscitate  all  the  patients  who  die 
every day,  and it is  necessary  to select  those  who  have  the  best 
chance  of  prolonged  and  useful  survival.  Why  should  life  be 
maintained  in  unconscious  patients  with  irreversible  brain 
damage  and  no  hope  of recovery? 

This  dramatic  decision  between  individual  life  and  death 
illustrates  both  man's  recently  acquired  power  and  the  neces 
sity  to  use  it  with  intelligence  and  compassion.  To  make  the 
situation even more complex,  the recent development of organ 
transplantation  is  creating  a  literally  "vital"  conflict  of  in 
terests  because  a  person  kept  alive  artificially  owns  many  good 
working organs-including kidneys,  pancreas,  heart,  and bones 
-that are needed by other dying patients. 

Death,  personality,  and  biological  human  rights  must  be 
redefined  in  view  of  these  new  scientific  advances.  Possessions 
to be disposed of after death include not only real estate, stocks, 
and furniture,  but teeth, corneas,  and hearts as  well.  This pros 
pect  involves  many  ethical  and  legal  questions  and  sounds  al 
together gruesome and uncomfortable,  but that is  only because 
it is unfamiliar. Giving blood to be transfused, skin to be grafted, 
spermatozoas  for  artificial  insemination,  and  kidneys  to  be 
transplanted are more acceptable  practices  because  they  do  not 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comMEDICAL  APPLICATIONS 

depend on  the  death  of  the donor;  but when  death  cannot  be 
avoided,  the  idea  of  the  transfer  and  survival  of  some  organs 
should  be considered  reasonable. 

The possibility of piecemeal survival of functions and organs 
introduces  the  basic  question  of what  part  of  the  organism  to 
identify  with  human  personality.  There  is  general  agreement 
that  the  organ  most  fundamental  to  individual  identity  is  not 
the stomach,  the  liver, or even  the  heart,  but the brain.  In the 
necessary  redefinition  of  death  it  has  been  proposed  that  in 
difficult  cases  when  circulation,  digestion,  metabolic  exchange, 
and  other  functions  are  still  active,  the  decisive  information 
about whether a  person should  be considered alive--entailing 
the  decision  to  continue  or  to  withdraw  artificial  support  for 
survival-must come  from  the  viability  of  the  brain.  In  some 
hospitals the ultimate arbiter of death is  the EEG machine, and 
at the Massachussetts General  Hospital,  Dr. Robert Schwab has 
proposed  that  death  should  be  determined  by flat  lines  on  all 
EEG leads for twenty minutes of continuous recordings and lack 
of response  to  sensory  and  mechanical  stimuli.  In  the  absence 
of EEG activity  tested  twenty-four  and forty-eight  hours  later, 
death is  presumed to have occurred even if (as  happens in rare 
cases)  the heart is  still beating normally. 

In the near future  it will  be necessary  to examine  this  ques 
tion  in  greater  detail  in  order  to  determine  the  parts  of  the 
brain considered essential for the survival of human personality. 
We  already  know  that portions of the  brain may  be  destroyed 
or taken away with negligible or only moderate psychic changes. 
Destruction  of  the  motor  cortex  produces  paralysis;  ablation 
of  the  temporal  lobe  may  affect  recent  memory;  and  destruc 
tion of the frontal  lobes  may modify foresight  and affective  re 
actions, but in all these cases the patient's behavior is recognized 
as  human. Destruction of the hypothalamus or reticular forma 
tion, however, may induce permanent loss of consciousness, and 
in this case it is  questionable whether personal  identity persists. 
The possible  piecemeal  survival of psychological  functions will 
make the definition of man  more difficult  and will  perhaps  in-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com206 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

crease the present problem of deciding what human life is. From 
the  examination  of  these  questions,  however,  a  deeper  under 
standing of the essential qualities of being human-and of the 
direction  of  their  evolution  with  intelligent  purpose-will 
emerge. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com21 

Ethical  Considerations 

Placing electrodes  inside  of  the  brain,  exploring  the  neuronal 
depth  of  personality,  and  influencing  behavior  by  electrical 
stimulation  have created a  variety  of  problems,  some  of  them 
shared with general  medical  ethics and others  more specifically 
related to moral and philosophical issues of mental activity. 

Clinical  Use  of  New  Procedures 

One  of  the  main  objectives  of  animal  research  is  the  dis 
covery  of  new  principles  and  methods  which  can  be  applied 
for  the  benefit  of  man.  Their  potential  advantages  and  risks 
cannot  be  ascertained  until  they  have  been  extensively  tested 
in human subjects,  and preliminary trials  must  always  be con 
sidered  experimental.  Evidence  that  penicillin  or  any  other 
new drug may be therapeutically effective is obtained initially in 
vitro and then in different species of mammals,  but the conclu 
sive  demonstration  of  its  clinical  safety  and  efficacy  requires 
application  to  man.  In spite  of established safeguards,  there is 
an  inherent  possibility  that  unforeseen,  slowly  developing 
side  effects  may  have serious  consequences.  A  thorium product 
used in the early thirties as a contrast medium for X-ray analysis 
of  the  liver  was  found  to  be  radioactive  and  caused  the  slow 
death of hundreds of patients. A supposedly innocuous drug, the 
ill-famed  thalidomide given as  a  sedative,  had damaging effects 
on  fetal  development,  creating  the  tragedy  of  children  born 

20'j 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com208 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

with severe  physical  deformities.  Accidents like these  have  pro 
moted more stringent regulations,  but the gap between animal 
and  human  biology  is  difficult  to  fill  and  in  each  case  a  com 
promise  must  be reached  between  reasonable  precautions  and 
possible risks. 

The  historical  demonstration  by  Fulton  and  Jacobsen  (81) 
that frustration and neurotic behavior in the chimpanzee could 
be  abolished  by destruction  of  the  frontal  lobes  was  the  start 
ing  point  of  lobotomy,  which  was  widely  used  for  treatment 
of  several  types  of  mental  illness  in  human  patients.  This 
operation  consisted  of  surgical  disruption  of  the  frontal  lobe 
connections  and  demonstrated  the  important  fact  that  psychic 
manifestations  can  be  influenced  by physical  means  as  bold  as 
the  surgeon's  knife.  The  Nobel  Prize  bestowed  on  the  first 
neurosurgeon  to  perform  human  lobotomies,  Egas  Moniz, 
recognized  the  significance  of the  principle  that  the  mind  was 
not so  unreachable  as  formerly  believed,  and  that  it could  be 
the  object of experimental  investigation. 

In spite of initial  acclaim,  lobotomy was  soon  severely  criti 
cized as  a  therapeutic procedure because  it often produced con 
comitant  undesirable  alterations  of  personality,  and  more 
conservative  treatments  were  actively  sought  in  order  to  pro 
vide  a  "less  damaging,  less  sacrificial  means  of  dealing  with 
mental  disorders  than  are  lobotomy,  leucotomy,  gyrectomy, 
thalamotomy,  and  other  intentional  destructions  of  nervous 
structures"  ( 145).  Among  these  efforts,  implantation  of  elec 
trodes in the brain offered  promising possibilities.  In monkeys, 
stimulation or limited  destruction  of  the  caudate  nucleus  pro 
duced several  of  the  symptoms  of  frontal  lobotomy  with  more 
discrete  behavioral  changes  ( 191 ).  Implantation  of  electrodes 
in man permitted access  to any cerebral structure for recording, 
stimulation, or destruction.  Their potential clinical application 
raised  controversial  issues  about  risks,  rationale,  and  medical 
efficacy,  but  there  is  general  agreement  that  depth  recordings 
may provide significant  information which  cannot  be obtained 
by  other  means  and  is  essential  for  the  proper  diagnosis  and 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comETHICAL  CONSIDERATIONS 

treatment  of  patients  with  some  cerebral  disturbances.  Thera 
peutic use of electrodes in cases of mental illness has been more 
doubtful and must still be considered in an experimental phase. 
Recordings and stimulations in a patient equipped with intra 
cerebral  leads  provide  basic  information  about  neurophysio 
logical mechanisms in man which may be of great value for  the 
patient  himself,  for  the  welfare  of other  patients,  and  for  the 
advance  of science.  In addition,  they  provide  a  unique  oppor 
tunity to obtain important data about neuronal functions which 
may not be directly related to  the  patient's  illness.  In  this  case 
we  are  facing  ethical  issues  of  human  research  which  must  bt> 
carefully considered. 

Human Experimentation 

While medical practice has generally accepted guidelines based 
on  the  Hippocratic  oath-to do  what "I consider  best  for  my 
patients,  and  abstain  from  whatever  -is  injurious"-research 
with  human  subjects  has  lacked  traditional  codes  and  has  fol 
lowed the investigator's personal criteria-which have not always 
been correct. According to Beecher (12), leading medical schools 
and  renowned  doctors  have  sometimes  conducted  unethical 
research.  Extremely  high  doses  of  a  drug  have  been  adminis 
tered, with resulting behavioral disturbances, in order to evalu 
ate the toxicity of the product; placebos have been given instead 
of a well-known beneficial drug, with a resulting increase in the 
incidence  and  severity  of  illness;  live  cancer  cells  have  been 
injected  under the skin of twenty-two  elderly patients without 
telling them  what  the  shots  were,  at  New York's well-respected 
Sloan-Kettering  Institute.  Beecher  does  not  believe  that  these 
studies  demonstrate  a · willful  disregard  of  the  patient's  rights, 
but a thoughtlessness in experimental design. 

Although no formal ethical code has been universally accepted 
for  the  performance  of research  in . man,  basic  guidelines  have 
been  formulated  by  the  American  Psychological  Association 
(43);  by the judges of the Nuremberg war crime trials  (218);  by 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com210 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

the  World  Medical  Association  (246);  and  by  the  Medical  Re 
search  Council  of  Britain  (153).  A  tg66  editorial  in  the  New 
England journal of Medicine  (t6t) states  that in medicine and 
in human  investigations  the  welfare  of  the  sick  patient or  the 
experimental subject has traditionally been of prime importance. 
"This implies clearly that therapeutic or theoretical experiments 
with  significant  risk  of morbidity or mortality  are  undertaken 
only with  a  view  to  the  immediate  benefit  of  the  patient;  for 
the  experimental  subject  to  whom  no  benefit  may  accrue,  the 
most meaningful  possible informed and unforced consent must 
be secured."  In  the  summer of  tg66,  the  United  States  Public 
Health  Service  issued  regulations  for  their  sponsored  research 
involving humans,  specifying  the  need  for  full  consent  by  the 
participating subjects  and careful  review  of  the  projects  by an 
ad hoc committee. In a detailed discussion, Wolfensberger (245) 
clarified  the  meaning  of informed  consent:  The  experimental 
subject  understands  all  the  essential  aspects  of  the  study,  the 
types  and  degrees  of risks,  the  detrimental  or beneficial  conse 
quences, if any, and the purpose of the research. 

One of  the main  ethical  issues  is  the  conflict  of  interest  be 
tween  science,  progress,  and  society,  and  the  rights  of  the 
individual. The principles of personal dignity, privacy, and free 
dom  are  often  waived-voluntarily  or  forcefully-in  favor  of 
the  group.  Firemen,  policemen,  and  soldiers  may  risk  or  lose 
their lives for  the benefit of the community.  Civilized activities 
are  full  of regulations which limit behavioral  freedom.  We are 
obliged  to reveal our income,  to pay  taxes,  and  to  serve  in  the 
army.  We cannot walk  around naked,  take  flowers  from  public 
gardens,  or  leave  our  cars  where  we  please.  We  are  searched 
when  crossing  borders  and  put  in  jail  if  our  conduct  is  con 
sidered antisocial by the law. Although respect for the individual 
is  highly  prized  and  accepted  in  theory,  in  practice  it  is  often 
challenged  and  curtailed.  The  balance  between  social  duties 
and  individual rights  is  decided  not  by  the  individual  but by 
customs and laws established by the group. 

In the case of medical research, it is difficult to write an ethical 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comETHICAL ·CONSIDERATIONS 

211 

code. As the Panel of Privacy and Behavioral Research concluded 
in  1967,  "legislation  to  assure  appropriate  recognition  of  the 
rights  of human  subjects  is  neither  necessary  nor  desirable," 
and "because of its relative inflexibility, legislation cannot meet 
the challenge of the subtle and sensitive conftic::t of values under 
consideration."  Ethical  decisions  in  science  require  not  only 
moral  judgtilent but also  factual  information, technical knowl 
edge,  and  experience,  especially  in  the  evaluation  of  risks  and 
be~efits.  Inorder to  decide  to  undergo  open  heart  surgery,  a 
patient must have a  medical evaluation of his  condition ;md of 
the state of  the surgical  art,  a  judgment which the doctor,  but 
rarely  the  patient,  is  prepared  to  make.  In  medidil  research, 
consent  is  certainly  essential,  but  the  main  responsibiliiy  still 
lies  with  the  investigator  and · his  instit:ution.  The  requ~st for 
consent  from  a  patient-or .from  a  student  participating  in  a 
research project-carries a heavy weight of moral authority and 
a  degree  of  coercion,  cmd  granting  of  it  does  not  relieve  the 
director  of  full  responsibility  in  the  experimental  design  and 
consequences.  The  simple  request ·to  perfonn  a  dubious  pro 
cedure  must  be  considered  unetbical · because  it  represents 
psychological  stress  for  the  patient.  Children and  adults  with 
mental  disturbances -cannot  give  proper ·consent,  and  relatives 
must  be  consulted.  Their  decisions,  however,  are  easily  influ 
enced by the picture presented by the attending physician, thus 
increasing his responsibility  which  prefei:-a.bly ·should  be .. shared 
by a group of three or more professional consultants. 

There is  one aspect of human research  which  is usually over 
looked:  the  existence  of  a  moral  (lnd  social  duty  to  advance 
scientific knowledge and to  improve  the welfare of man.  When 
important medical information can be obtained with negligible 
risk and without infringing on individual rights, the investigator 
has  the duty  to  use  his intelligence and skills  for  this  purpose. 
Failure to do so  represents the neglect of professional  duties  in 
some way similar to the negligence of a medical doctor who does 
not apply his full  effort  to the care  of a  patient.  Subjects-with 
implanted electrodes  provide  a  good  example,  because . the  use 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com212 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

of telemetry. and video tape recordings  in them  makes  possible 
many studies  concerning  the  sources  of  normal  and  abnormal 
activities, spectral analysis of electrical  waves,  conduction time, 
evoked potentials, and electrobehavioral correlations. This type 
of  research  may  provide  data  of  exceptional  value-available 
only  from  man-without any  risks  or  even  demands  on  a  pa 
tient's time or attention. Information can be obtained while the 
subject is engaged in spontaneous normal activities like reading 
a  paper,  watching  television,  or  sleeping.  Only  the  recording 
equipment  and  research  team  need  to  be  alert  and  working. 
Methodology for  the telemetric study of the brain is  very  new, 
and  it will  take some  time  before  its  potential  and  practicality 
are recognized and its use  spreads  to different  hospitals.  In my 
opinion this research is both ethical and desirable. 

However,  procedures  which  represent  risk  or discomfort  for 
the  patient  should  be  ruled  out.  The  implantation  time  of 
electrodes  cannot  be  prolonged  unnecessarily,  and  administra 
tion  of  drugs,  injections,  or  catheterizations  for  research  pur 
poses  are  not  acceptable.  Any  contemplated  exception  to  this 
rule  should  be  very  carefully  evaluated  and  clearly  explained 
to the experimental subject. 

When  a  patient  needs  to  have  electrodes  in  his  brain  for 
a  period of weeks or months, the medical doctors in charge face 
a  dual  responsibility,  first  not  to  do  anything  harmful  or  un 
pleasant  for  the  sake  of science,  and second  to  do  as  much  re 
search  as  possible  provided  it is  safe  and  comfortable  for  the 
patient. 

The use  of healthy  volunteers  in medical  research  is  contro 
versial,  partly because  they  are  usually  recruited  from  prisons, 
the  military  services,  universities,  or  other  groups  which  are 
more or less bound to authority and therefore have a diminished 
capacity  for  free  choice.  One  of  the  most  famous  experiments 
was  a  study  of  antimalarial  drugs  which  had  to  be  performed 
in man. In a well-planned research project 1,ooo army volunteers 
in Australia were deliberately infected with malaria.  This study 
was  later  continued  in  several  federal  penitentiaries  in  the 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comETHICAL  CONSIDERATIONS 

United States.  A  most dramatic and successful mass  experiment 
was  the  application  of  poliomyelitis  vaccine  to  thousands  of 
school  children  a  few  years  ago,  statistically  demonstrating  the 
effectiveness  of  a  new  vaccine.  Decisions  about  experiments 
like these must be reached by careful consideration of the factors 
involved, with the basic ethical guidelines clearly in mind. 

Individual  volunteers  have  greater  freedom  of  choice,  and 
I  have  received  letters  from  many  people  offering  themselves 
as  "human guinea pigs"  for implantation of electrodes  in their 
brains. For both ethical and practical reasons their offers cannot 
be aq:epted,  but it is  interesting to note the varied motivations 
behind  these  proposals.  They  included  pure  scientific  interest. 
hopes for monetary reward or fame,  manifestations of psychotic 
disturbances,  and  also  a  most  generous  intent:  Some  people 
wished to donate their brains for study in the hope that informa 
tion could be obtained leading to the cure of loved ones whose 
brain  dysfunctions  could  not  be  cured  by  standard  therapies. 
The most articulate expression of this wish  to  contribute one's 
own brain for scientific research was that of a most distinguished 
investigator,  Dr.  David Rioch,  who at the close  of a  conference 
about  the  unanesthetized  brain,  held  in  Washington,  D.C.,  in 
1957, declared: 

When  I  come  to  retire  .  .  .  I  might  quite  reasonably  approach  an 
experimental neurosurgeonin whose work andscientific orientation 
I  had  confidence  and  say  "Let  us  do  an  experiment  together,  as 
there are a number of things both you and I  would like to find out." 
I  would  be  considerably  intrigued  to  know  what  "attitudes"  and 
"sensations"  a  good  experimenter  could  evoke  electrically  from  my 
amygdala and even more intrigued to check personally on the sense 
of euphoria and the sense  of disphoria (185). 

Electrical  Manipulation  of  the  Psyche 

The most  alarming aspect  of ESB  is  that  psychological  reac 
tivity can be influenced by applying a few volts to a  determined 
area of the brain. This fact  has been interpreted by many people 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

as  a  disturbing  threat  to  human  integrity.  In  the  past,  the  in 
dividual could face  risks and pressures with preservation of his 
own identity.  His body could be tortured, his  thoughts and de 
sires could be challenged by bribes, by emotions, and by  public 
opinion, and his behavior could be influenced by environmental 
circumstances,  but he  always  had  the  privilege  of  deciding his 
own  fate,  of  dying  for  an  ideal  without  changing  his  mind. 
Fidelity  to  our  emotional  and  intellectual  past  gives  each  of 
us  a  feeling  of  transcendental  stability-and  perhaps  of  im 
mortality-which is  more precious  than life  itself. 

New neurological technology, however, has a refined efficiency. 
The individual is defenseless against direct manipulation of the 
brain  because  he  is · deprived  of his  most  intimate  mechanisms 
of  biological  reactivity.  In  experiments,  electrical  stimulation 
of appropriate intensity always prevailed over free will;  and, for 
example, flexion of the hand evoked by stimulation of the motor 
cortex cannot be vohintarily avoided. Destruction of the frontal 
lobes  produced  changes  in  affectiveness  which  are  beyond  any 
personal  control. 

The possibility of scientific annihilation of personal identity, 
or even  worse,  its  purposeful control,  has  sometimes  been  con 
sidered a future threat more awful  than atomic holocaust.  Even 
physicians have expressed doubts about the propriety of physical 
tampering with  the  psyche, maintaining that  personal  identity 
should  be  inviolable,  that  any  attempt  to  modify  individual 
behavior  is  unethical,  and that  methods--and  related  research 
-which can influence the human brain should be banned. The 
prospect of any degree of physical control of the mind provokes 
a variety of objections:  theological  objections because  it affects 
free will, moral objections because it affects  individual responsi 
bility,  ethical  objections  because  it  may  block  self-defense 
mechanisms,  philosophical  objections  because  it  threatens  per 
sonal  identity. 

These  objections,  however,  are  debatable.  A  prohibition  of 
scientific  advance  is  obviously  naive  and  unrealistic.  It  could 
not  be  universally  imposed,  and,  more  important,  it  is  not 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comETHICAL  CONSIDERATIONS 

knowledge itself but its improper US<;!  which sho~ld be regulated. 
A knife  is  neither good  nor -bad;  but it may" be  used  by either 
a surgeon or an assassin~ Science should be :pe,utral,-but scientists 
should  take sides  ( 242 ).  The mind. is not a  static,  inborn entity 
owned  by  the  individuaL and. selfrsuffident,  hut  the  dynamic 
organization of sensory perceptions of the, external  world,  cor 
related and reshaped . through the internal an<ttomical and func 
tional  structure  of  the  brain;  Personality  is  not an  intangible, 
immutable way of reacting, but a  flexible  process in continuous 
evolution,  affected  by  its  'medium.  Culture  and  education  are 
meant to shape patterns of reaction which are-not innate in the 
human organism;  they are meant to hnposeJim.its  on  freedom 
of choice.  Moral codes may vary completely from civilization to 
civilization.  Polygamy  was  acceptable :in bibli~l .times,  and  it 
is  still  practiced  among  Moslems,  but jt is : rej.ected . by  many 
other  civilizations  with  strong  -social,  -legal,  religious,  and 
educational pressures to make behavior monogamous.  Of course 
there  is  no  physical impediment  to  the  acquisition  of  half  ·a 
dozen wives-at least:until the law or the ladies catch up-,.-but 
then we enter into a play-of forces;.intothe,dynamkequilibrium 
among all  of  the  elements which determine behavioral choice. 
If there are very strong reasons to react in a  particular way (for 
example, to have only one wiff!), the chance of-living by a dilfer 
ent custom  is  so  slim as  to  be negligible: 

This is precisely the role ofelectricalstim-ulation·ofthe brain: 
to add a new factor  to the constellation· of behavioral determin" 
ants. The result as  shown experimentally iri-animals is an alge 
braic  summation,  with  cerebral  stimulation  usually  prepotent 
over spontaneous reactions. It is.accepted medical ·practice to try 
and  modify · the  antisocial  or  abnormal  reactions ·of  mental 
patients.  Psychoanalysis,  the  use  of  drugs  sqch  as  energizers 
and  tranquilizers,  the  application  of insulin  or . electroshock, 
and ·other  varieties  of. psychiatric  treatment-are -all  aimed  at 
influencing the abnormal  personality of the patient in order to 
change his undesirable mental characteristics. The possible use, 
therefore, of implanted electrodes in mental patients.should not 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com216 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

pose  unusual  ethical  complications  if  the  accepted  medical 
rules  are  followed.  Perhaps  the  limited  efficiency  of  standard 
psychiatric  procedures is  one reason  that  they have  not caused 
alarm  among  scientists  or  laymen.  Psychoanalysis  requires  a 
long time, and a person can easily withdraw his cooperation and 
refuse  to  express  intimate  thoughts.  Electroshock  is  a  crude 
method  of doubtful  efficacy  in  normal  people.  Although  elec 
trical  stimulation of the brain is  still  in  the  initial stage  of  its 
development,  it is in contrast far  more selective  and powerful; 
it may delay a  heart beat, move a finger,  bring a  word to mem 
ory, or set a determined behavioral tone. 

When  medical  indications  are  clear  and  the  standard  thera 
peutic  procedures  have  failed,  most  patients  and  doctors  are 
willing  to  test a new  method,  provided  that  the  possibility  of 
success outweighs the risk of worsening the situation. The crucial 
decision  to start applying a  new  therapeutic method to human 
patients  requires  a  combination  of  intelligent  evaluation  of 
data,  knowledge  of  comparative  neurophysiology,  foresight, 
moral integrity, and courage. Excessive aggressiveness in a doctor 
may cause  irreparable  damage,  but  too  much  caution  may  de 
prive  patients  of  needed  help.  The  surgical  procedure  of 
lobotomy  was  perhaps  applied  to  many  mental  patients  too 
quickly,  before  its  dangers  and  limitations  were  understood; 
but pallidectomy and thalamotomy in the treatment of Parkin 
son's  disease  encountered  formidable  initial  opposition  before 
attaining their present recognition and respected status. 

While pharmacological and surgical  treatment of sufferers of 
mental illness is accepted as proper, people with other behavioral 
deviations  pose  a  different  type  of  ethical  problem.  They  may 
be potentially dangerous to themselves and to society when their 
mental functions are maintained within normal limits and only.,. 
one  aspect  of  their  personal  conduct  is  socially  unacceptable. 
The  rights  of  an  individual  to  obtain  appropriate  treatment 
must be weighed with a professional evaluation of his behavioral 
problems-and  their  possible  neurological  basis-which  neces 
sitates a value judgment of the person's behavior in comparison 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comETHICAL  CONSIDERATIONS 

with  accepted  norms.  One  example  will  illustrate  these  con 
siderations. 

In  the  early  1950s,  a  patient  in  a  state  mental  hospital  ap 
proached Dr.  Hannibal  Hamlin  and  me  requesting  help.  She 
was an attractive 24-year-old woman of average intelligence and 
education who  had a  long record of arrests  for  disorderly  con 
duct.  She had been repeatedly involved in bar brawls in which 
she incited men to fight over her and had spent most of the pre 
ceding  few  years  either  in  jail  or  in  mental  institutions.  The 
patient expressed a strong_ desire as  well as an inability to alter 
her conduct,  and because  psychiatric  treatment had  failed,  she 
and  her  mother  urgently  requested  that  some ·kind  of brain 
surgery be performed in order to control  her disreputable,  im 
pulsive  behavior.  They  asked  specificially  that  electrodes  be 
implanted  to  orient  possible  electrocoagulation  of  a  limited 
cerebral area; and if that wasn't possible, they wanted lobotomy. 
Medical  knowledge  and  experience  at  that  time  could  not 
ascertain  whether  ESB  or  the  application  of  cerebral  lesions 
could  help  to  solve  this  patient's  problem,  and  surgical  inter 
vention  was  therefore  rejected.  When  this  decision  was  ex 
plained,  both  the  patient and  her mother reacted  with  similar 
anxious comments, asking, "What is the future? Only jail or the 
hospital?  Is  there  no hope?"  This case  revealed  the  limitations 
of  therapy  and  the  dilemma  of  possible  behavioral  control. 
Supposing  that  long-term  stimulation  of  a  detern:lined  brain 
structure  could  influence  the  tendencies  of a  patient to drink, 
flirt,  and  induce  fights;  would  it be  ethical  to  change  her  per 
sonal  characteristics?  People  are  changing  their  character  by 
self-medication  through hallucinogenic drugs,  but do  they have 
the right to demand that doctors administer · treatment that will 
radically alter their behavior? What are the limits of individual 
rights and doctors'  obligations? 

As  science  seems  to  be  approaching  the  possibility  of  con 
trolling many aspects of behavior electronically and chemically, 
these questions must be answered. If, as in the case of this patient, 
the  deviation  of  behavior  conflicts  with  society  so  seriously  as 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com218 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

to  deprive  her  of  her  personal  freedom,  medical  intervention 
could be justified. The case of habitual criminal conduct is  an 
other  example  of  this  type  of  problem.  Therapeutic  decisions 
related  to  psychic  manipulation  require  moral  integrity  and 
ethical  education.  Scientific  training  concentrates  mainly  in 
natural  sciences  and  often  neglects  the  study  and  assimilation 
of ethical codes, considering them beyond the realm of science. 
Perhaps it is  often forgotten that the investigator needs a  set of 
convictions and principles, not only to administrate grant money, 
to give  proper credit to  the work of others,  and  to  be  civilized 
with  his  colleagues,  but  especially  to  direct  his  life  and  his 
research, and to foresee  the implications of his own discoveries. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com21 

Social  Implications 

From  ancient  times,  man  has  tried  to  control the  destiny  of 
other human beings by depriving them of liberty and submitting 
them to obedience. Slaves have been forced to work and to serve 
the  caprices  of their  masters;  prisoners  have  been  chained  to 
row in the galleys;  and men were and still are inducted into the 
armed forces  and sent thousands of miles away  to  create havoc, 
take lives, and lose their own. 

Biological  assault  has  also  existed  throughout  recorded  his 
tory.  In ancient China, the feet _of female  children were bound 
to reduce  their size.  In many countries  thieves have  been  pun 
ished  by having  their hands cut qff;  males have  been  castrated 
to  inhibit sexual  desire and  then  pl~ced as  eunuchs  in  charge 
of harems; and in some African tribes it was customary to ablate 
the clitoris of married females to block their possible interest in 
other  men  and  insure  their  fidelity,  These  barbaric  practices 
belong  to  the  past,  but  the  forceful  imposition  of  biological 
changes still continues in our age. Sterilization of human beings 
by surgery or radiation has  been legally  imposed in some  lands 
as  a  punishment for  sexu.U  crimes  or a  preventive  measure  to 
avoid the spread of genetic defects. In the face of the real danger 
of population explosion, several scientists have proposed govern 
ment enforced regulations to control fertility, and it is expected 
that  in the next  few  years  an  antifertility  drug,  which  can  be 
added to the water supplies of cities, will be developed.  Accord~ 
ing  to  Ketchel  (126),  "Voluntary  methods  are  to  be  preferred 

~ug 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com220 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

but only if they work.  If they do not,  then involuntary controls 
must be imposed .... Such measures are preferable to the starva 
tion and misery resulting from overpopulation." 

When an individual's behavior is judged unfit by members of 
a  society,  the consequences  may be  forceful  deprivation  of lib 
erty and incarceration. If the individual is confined to a  mental 
hospital,  his  undesirable  conduct  may  cause  the  authorities  to 
administer drugs,  by forceful  injection if necessary,  in order  to 
change  or control  his  behavioral  responses.  In  the  early  1950s 
an  historical  precedent  was  established  for  the  deliberate  de 
struction of part of the brain as  a  legal  treatment for criminals 
(130).  A  man  apprehended  in  Pittsburgh  after  committing  a 
series  of robberies was  given  the alternative of a  long  jail  sen 
tence or submission to frontal lobe surgery which might curb or 
eliminate  his  future  criminal  behavior.  Lobotomy  was  per 
formed,  and  although initially the  patient appeared  better  ad 
justed socially,  several  months  later he committed more  thefts. 
When  he  realized  that  the  police  were  closing  in,  he  wrote  a 
letter to  the surgeon expressing appreciation  for  his efforts  and 
regret that  the operation had not been successful.  Hoping that 
the  study  of  his  case  might  help  others,  he  donated  his  brain 
to  the  surgeon  and·  committed  suicide  by  shooting  himself 
through  the heart.  In spite of this  therapeutic  failure,  the  pos 
sibility  of  surgical  rehabilitation  of  criminals  has  been  con 
sidered  by  several  scientists  as  more  humane,  more  promising, 
and  less  damaging  for  the  individual  than  his  incarceration 
for life. 

Even  if  our  conduct  is  entirely  within  the  law,  we  cannot 
escape  the intervention of the  state  in our private  lives  and in 
our most  intimate  biology.  In  general,  we  are  not  even  aware 
of it.  Many "free" societies,  including the United States,  do not 
allow a  bride and groom  to marry legally until  blood has  been 
drawn  from  their  veins  and  a medical  officer  has  certified  the 
absence .of syphilis,  a  procedure  which  casts  a  rather  insulting 
doubt on their past integrity and intelligence. In order to cross 
international boi-ders,  it is  necessary  to document  that our skin 
has recently been scarified and injected with smallpox.  In many 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comSOCIAL  IMPLICATIONS 

221 

cities,  by  governmental  regulations,  the  drinking  water  floods 
our bodies with chlorine for safety reasons and with fluoride for 
strengthening our  teeth.  The table  salt  that  we- buy  is  usually 
fortified with iodine to aid the proper physiology of our thyroid 
gland. These intrusions into our private blood, teeth, and glands 
are accepted,  practiced, and enforced.  Naturally they have been 
legally introduced, are  useful  for  the  prevention of illness,  and 
generally  benefit  society  and  individuals,  but  they  have  also 
already established the precedent of official  manipulation of our 
personal biology. 

To evaluate the rationale of governmental intervention in our 
bodies, we must realize that civilization represents a considerable 
degree  of  biological  artificiality,  mainly  the  intelligent  escape 
from  a  primitive  natural  fate  which  was  characterized  by  the 
death of  countless  babies,  the  short span · of  life,  and  the  high 
incidence  of  illness  and  physical  misery.  Human  health  has 
improved in a spectacular way precisely because official agencies 
have had the knowledge and the power to influence our personal 
biology, and it should be emphasized that health regulations are 
similar in dictatorial and in democratic countries. 

Our  own  existence  from  birth  to  death  must  be  properly 
certified  to  be officially  recognized,  and we  are  surrounded  by 
government-regulated industrial manipulations which extend to 
the  food  we  eat,  the  water  we  drink,  and  the  conditioned  air 
we  breathe.  We are in a  highly organized age where social  and 
individual needs often conflict, and social ruling usually prevails. 
From the medical point of view this organization is highly bene 
ficial,  but  the  loss  of personal  self-:determination  is  one  of  the 
problems  of  civilized  life  which  must  be  carefully  confronted 
if  we  are  to  reach  reasonable  compromises.  Even  if  we  agree 
that  individual  freedom  should  in  general  bow  to  community 
welfare,  we  enter into a  new  dimension  when  considering  the 
social  implications  of  the  new  technology  which  can  influence 
personal structure and behavioral expression  by surgical,  chem 
ical,  and electrical manipulation of the  brain.  We may  tolerate 
the  practicality  of  being  inoculated  with  yellow  fever  when 
visiting  Asiatic  countries,  but  shall  we  accept  the  theoretical 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com222 

PHYSICAL CONTROL •OF ·THE  MIND 

.future  possibility of being forced  to take a  pill or submit to an 
electric shock  for  the socially  protective  purpose  of making  us 
more docile,  infertile,  better workers,  or happier?  How can we 
decide the limits of social· impositions on individual rights? 

It is  convenient to remember . that ·.  the  art of .mental  escape 
from  reality · has  been practiced · from  ancient  times,  especially 
by using drugs.  Opium, for exa~nple, has probably been known 
since  the Stone Age> and .its  extensive u8e in the  Near and Far 
East has sometimes ·been encouraged  by local  rulers,  partly be 
cause populations under opium habituation were more apathetic 
and easier to govern. Peyote also has a long history, being known 
to the Mexican Indians since pre-Colrimbian times and revered 
by some  as  a  link to the divine.  A  substance  closely  related  to 
peyote  alkaloids  is  lSD (d-lysergic  acid  diethylamide  tartrate), 
which  has  powerful  effects  on ·behavioral reactivity  at a  micro 
gram  dose,  and  which,  along. with marijuana,  has  contributed 
to changes in the mental and behavioral • attitudes of recent gen 
erations.  During the last fifteen  years,  a large  number of  tran 
quilizers,  energizers,  and  other  psychoactive  drugs  have  been 
discovered, and their use has changed the atm.osphere of mental 
hospitals and the practice of psychiatry.  They are  highly  bene 
ficial  both  for  patients and for relatively  normal  persons  who 
need pharmacological help to cope  with  the  pressures  of civil 
ized life.  The widespread use of psychoactive substances includ 
ing  alcohol,  caffeine,  nicotine,  opium,  chlorpromazine,  and 
LSD  may  have  an  incalculable  impact on  the  social  behavior 
of large  population groups.  Administration of a  chemical  mist 
in  order  to  subdue  hostile  crowds  has  already  been  used  as  a 
strategic  weapon  by armies  and  by  local  police.  There  is  no 
doubt  that even  more  selective  and powerful  psychodrugs  will 
be  discovered  in  the  near  future  and  that  decisions  must  be 
made  to regulate  their use and  to  prevent  their abuse. 

The history  of ESB is  very tecent, but already  there  is  abun 
dant  information  about  its  effectiveness  and  fears  about  the 
dangers of its social misuses.  Could a ruthless dictator stand at a 
master radio transmitter and stimulate the depth of the brains .of 
a mass of hopelessly enslaved people? This Orwellian possibility 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comSOCIAL  IMPLICATIONS 

223 

may provide a good plot for a novel, but fortunately it is beyond 
the  theoretical  and  practical limits  of ESB.  By  means  of ESB 
we  cannot  substitute · one  personality  for another,  nor  can  we 
make a behaving robot of a human being.  It is  true that we can 
influence  emotional  reactivity  and  perhaps  make  a  patient 
more  aggressive  or amorous,  but  in  each  case  the  details  of 
behavioral expression are related to an individual history which 
cannot be created by ESB. The classical methods of punishment 
and reward  through normal inputs are more effective in induc 
ing purposeful changes in behavorial activity than the modifica 
tions  of emotional tuning evoked  by cerebral  stimulation.  Sev 
eral of the psychoactive drugs may be nearly as effective and are 
far simpler to use. 

Both medical benefits  and social  implications of cerebral re 
search  depend  on  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  about  brain 
physiology,  the  possibility  of investigating  the  mechanisms  of 
the mind experimentally,  the new approach to the understand 
ing of the determinants of reward and punishment in relation 
to human emotions and desires,  and  the  unveiling of the  neu 
ronal  basis of personal  identity: 

Understanding  of  biology,  physics1 -and  other  sciences  facil 
itated the process of ecological liberation and domination.  Man 
rebelled  from  natural  determination ·. and  used  his . intelligence 
and skills to  impose  a  human  purpo$e  on the  development  of 
the earth. We are now on the verge of a process of mental libera 
tion and self-domination  which  is  a  continuation of our evolu 
tion.  Its  experimental  approach is  based  on  the  investigation 
of  the  depth  of  the  brain  in  behaving  subjects.  Its  practical 
applications do not rely on direct cerebral manipulations but on 
the  integration  of  neurophysiological and  psychological  prin 
ciples leading to a more intelligent edueation, starting from  the 
moment of birth and continuiqg throughout life,  with · the pre 
conceived plan ofescaping ·from  the . blind forces  of chance and 
of  influencing  cerebral · mechanisms  and  mental  structure  in 
order to create a future mail with greater personal freedom and 
originality,  a  member of a  psychocivilized society,  happier,  less 
destructive,  and  better balanced than  present  man  (55). 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com23 

Neurophysiology  and Mental  Activities 

The scientific study and possible prediction of human behavior 
have  been  challenged  by  several  authors  who  questioned  the 
existence  of  a  cause-effect  relationship  and  even  claimed  that 
analysis of intelligent goal-seeking activities,  which are so  typic 
ally  human,  requires  methodology  completely  different  from 
that used in physical sciences (179).  For many years,  Bertalanffy 
( 17),  in agreement with last century's German  idealistic  philos 
ophy,  supported  the  view  that  organisms  are  more  than  the 
sum of their  parts.  He favored  a  new conception  of man  based 
on  his  faculties  of  symbolic  expression  and  offered  an  organ 
ismal approach different from that of "hard science."  Criticizing 
the  stimulus-response  paradigm,  Bertalanffy  identified  it  with 
the  "robot model"  which  Koestler  has  called  "the ratomorphic 
view  of man"  (129). 

Controversy  about  the  possible  physicochemical  determina 
tion  of  human  behavior  is  important  because  it  involves  the 
concepts of free will and responsibility.  Its philosophical history 
begins before Democritus and passes through Aristotle, Spinoza, 
Claude  Bernard,  and  many other well-known  authorities.  In  a 
brief  and  lucid  review,  Griinbaum  (go)  has  outlined  the  four 
main arguments against causality of human behavior:  ( 1)  Since 
each  individual  is  unique,  his  behavior  is  not  predictable  or 
amenable  to causal  description.  (2)  Human behavior is  so  com 
plex that it eludes analysis of a problematic causality. (3)  Human 
behavior is  oriented  toward  future  goals  and is  not determined 

224 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comNEUROPHYSIOLOGY  AND  MENTAL  ACTIVITIES 

225 

by  past  facts  as  in  the  physical  sciences.  (4)  The  acceptance  of 
behavioral  causality  and  predictability  would  deny  responsi 
bility, remorse, and possible choice of good and evil.  Griinbaum 
rejects  these  four arguments on logical  and scientific bases,  but 
the  best  proof  that  most  of  us  believe  in  at  least  a  degree  of 
behavioral  predictability  is  that we  teach  our children  to  talk, 
to use the toilet, arid to live in a civilized society, and that within 
a range of variability we do succeed in educating them. 

Modem  cerebral  physiology,  which  is  fully  deterministic, 
provides a  new set of arguments. It has been demonstrated that 
when  perception  of  sounds  is  totally  blocked,  the  auditory 
neurons  of  the  inferior  colliculus  are  impoverished  in  specific 
chemicals  such  as  RNA.  Lights,  shapes,  or  moving  shadows 
presented to the eye produce specific electrical waves which can 
be recorded in the occipital lobes and which are causally related 
to the optic phenomena. Brain stimulation determines sensation, 
movement,  or emotion  depending  on the  activated  structure. 
The  material  presented  in  this  book  includes  many  examples 
of cause-effect  between ESB  and behavioral responses. 

Against this experimental determinism it has been argued that 
spontaneous  behavior  is  different  from  laboratory  phenomena 
and, more important, that the gap between neuronal physiology 
and mental activities  is  still  immense.  How can we  relate  elec 
trical  spikes  or  ionic  changes  in  the  cells  with  the  reality . of 
enjoying  music,  being in  love,  or writing .a book?  Are  mental 
activities and neuronal physiology as  unrelated to each other as 
the message  of a  painting and  the chemical  structure of colors 
and  canvas?  Kety  ( 127)  has  indicated  that  there  is  no  valid 
physicochemical  model to explain the phenomena of conscious 
ness, and little likelihood of developing one. The sensation of a 
blue  sky  cannot  be  understood  or  even  described  in  terms  of 
changes  in  the  retina,  or  spikes  traveling  through  the  optic 
nerve, occipital cortex, and association areas. 

To clarify this discussion let us review a classical experiment. 
In a  cat under deep anesthesia,  electrodes can be placed in the 
inner ear and connected with an electrical amplifier and a loud-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

speaker. The spectacular result is  that if we whisper in the eat's 
ear,  "How are you?"  the loudSpeaker will reproduce  "How are 
you?"  The  interpretation  of  this  phenomenon  is  not  that  the 
cat has learned to speak English but that its ear has worked as a 
microphone,  transducing sound into electricity.  The vibrations 
of  the  air  produced  by  the  human  voice  are  received  by  the 
tympanic  membrane  and  give  rise  to  electrical  signals  in  the 
cochlea  which are  picked up by  the  recording  electrodes.  The 
cochlea  functions  as  an  acoustic  analyzer  which  generates  "all 
or none"  spikes  in  single  nerve  fibers,  sending coded  messages 
to  the  brain.  Sensory  inputs  impinging  on  different  sensory 
receptors like the ear, eye, or skin originate patterns of electrical 
signals which can be recorded at ascending levels of the central 
nervous system. 

In  the  attempt  to  correlate  physicochemical  events  of  the 
brain with psychological phenomena, we must differentiate three 
groups  of  neuronal  functions:  ( 1)  Basic  metabolic  changes  are 
necessary  to  keep  the  nerve  cells  alive,  receptive,  and  reactive. 
These  processes,  which  include  ionic  exchange,  oxidation  of 
chemicals,  and consumption of energy,  are absolutely necessary 
but are unspecific and not directly correlated with psychological 
responses. They allow the traffic of signals independently of their 
quality.  (2)  A  material  carrier  of  coded  signals  is  needed  to 
circulate information  through  the central nervous system.  This 
carrier  is  represented  by  chemical  changes  and  electric_al  im 
pulses which can be recorded, identified, and measured. Without 
senses,  without neural  conductors,  or  without  basic  metabolic 
activity,  reception  of  information  is  not  possible,  but  these 
mechanisms are  to a  great extent unlearned  and  automatic.  At 
these  levels  there  is  no  understanding  of  messages,  and  the 
signals  have  not  yet  been  decoded.  A  gross  similarity  may  be 
found  in a record player where the  pickup cartridge transforms 
the irregularities of record grooves into electrical patterns travel 
ing through the electronic circuitry of the amplifier where  they 
can  be  mixed,  delayed,  or changed  in  tonality.  At  these  levels, 
the material  carrier is formed by electrical pulses with a voltage 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comNEUROPHYSIOLOGY  AND  MENTAL  ACTIVITIES 

227 

which can be meal>ured and a  pattern which .can  be seen  in the 
oscilloscope, even without krwwing th<~.t th,ere  is a musical mes 
sage.  In  order  to  perceive  the  notes  of the  melody,  a  suitable 
decoding  mechani~m. the _ loud,speak.er~ is  necessa,ry.  One  more 
element is  needed .to u{lderstand the I{lusic<~,l SOUilds:  a suitable 
sensor,  a  human  being  wid:t  previo}Js  .training . to  recognize 
music.  (3)  The symbolic  meaning of ,a  JJ:lessage . i$ .not  intrinsic 
in the object or in the. material carrier. Its. UJ1~erstanding is  not 
providedautomatkally byinborn __ rnechan,isJ:PSwid:tin the brain. 
Recognition of messages  mUoSt be learn.e4 and is  related  to  the 
experiential history of each. individu<Jl~.  When .we slJ.ow  a  pencil 
to  a  monkey,  a  savage, and a  cultured man,  the visuaLsensory 
inputs are  transformed into electrical  ~tterns and  transmitted 
through optic pathways. In all  three -cases tllisinitial process  is 
probably comparable and the  transmitte(j.  elte<:trical signals  are 
probably similar,  but the  interpretation w~ll be  differeut.  For 
a monkey and for a  savage,  the ~cil ~ o:Qly  a,  little stick;  but 
for a writer the pencil has mapy u~ a.~4 meaPWgs~ .and it con 
veys a multitude of associations.  Symbolism is not in the pen~il 
or in the receptive  brain . hut in their previous encounters and 
relations. 

· 

The distinction betweeJ;) material ca.rrier and symbolic mean 
ing is  important for  the  clari&cation_ :~ tlJ.e  limitations of elec 
trophysiological  studies  of .the ])rain.  Evet.J;  if our methodology 
for recording electrical cod.es of tl"allSmitted,signals wel'e highly 
sophisticated,  we  would only be able  to  detec;t  the. carrier,  and 
not the meaning. We could identify the .sl:lipe ()fa stick circulat 
ing  in  visual  pathways,  but not  its  history.  Symbolism  cannot 
be deciphered  by any instn,lment when ,the  reference  point  of 
past experience is unknown. The {ral{le ofreference which must 
be examined to capture a  me<mingisthe individual experience 
stored inside  the  brain by means . of special  material  carriers of 
information,  probably  stereoch,emicaLcombinations  of  amino 
acids and other substancesforming.the .nl}cleoproteic structure 
of memory  traces .. ,SymbolisJl1 - i~ found  by  recalling _ experience 
from memory storageandcomparing it with the received inputs. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF THE  MIND 

Two events are therefore  taking place:  comparative  evaluation 
and  temporal  correlation.  This  constitutes  the  physiochemical 
basis  of  individual  reactivity,  and  it  is  a  matter  of  definition 
whether  these  processes are  considered~ material  (because  es 
sential  material events are involved)  or as  immaterial  (because 
the processes depend on comparison and temporal correlation). 
It is more important to understand the terms ofdiscussion than 
to decide on a definition. 

The human  newborn  brain  has,  among  other  qualities,  the 
capacity  to  learn  languages,  abstract  thinking,  and  moral  judg 
ment,  but  not  to  create  them.  With  the  ideological  materials 
received during childhood and the initial training in how to use 
them,  a  more adult brain may find  new combinations and new 
ideas,  but  only  in  reference  to  information  received  from  the 
outside.  In  each  individual,  conscious  or  subconscious  under 
standing  of  messages  is  probably  dependent  upon  progressive 
steps  of  chemical  and  electrical  subcoding  of  sensory  inputs, 
with  the  resulting creation  of neW  material  carriers  and  codes 
which activate a  new series  of electrical and chemical  phenom 
ena, involving constellations of specialized neurons. These ideas 
are  hypothetical  but they  have  the  advantage  of  being  useful 
working hypotheses that can be tested experimentally. 

While  recording  of electrical  activity  in  the  brain  provides 
information limited  to  the carriers,  it should be  expected that 
electrical  stimulation of neuronal  fields  may activate  intracere 
bral processes related to both initial material carriers and subse 
quent  sub~arriers  of ·symbolic  meaning  and  past  experiences 
stored in the brain.  In this way we could differentiate  between 
the  cerebral mechanisms responsible  for simple transmission  of 
inputs and for  the cognitive processing of received information. 
At  the  present moment we  still  lack  neurophysiological  under 
standing  of  how  we  enjoy  music  or  recognize  a  pencil,  but at 
least we  have methodologies and working hypotheses  to  investi 
gate  the  problem,  and already  we  can create  musical  and  optic 
hallucinatory perceptions by direct stimulation of some areas of 
the brain. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPart  V 

TOWARD  A  PSYCHO 
CIVILIZED  SOCIETY 

Since war begins in the minds of men,  it is  in  the  minds 
of men that the defences of peace must be constructed. 

-UNESCO Constitution 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com24 

Social Dependence  and Individual Freedom 

It was a: blow to human pride when Copernicus and other astron 
omers discovered  that the  planet earth is  neither  the  center  of 
the universe nor the center of the solar system, not even unique 
among celestial  bodies,  but only an insignificant  bit of  matter 
in the immensity of galaxies,  many of which may contain other 
highly developed planets (66,  113). The modesty of the spaceship 
earth  is  a  reality,  and we  must accept  it and  adapt  to  it. Only 
then  can  we  understand  our  universe  and  start  planning  .to 
conquer the stars. 

Darwin gave our pride a  second · blow a11d  made an historical 
step toward understanding ourselves.  Man had embellished fan 
tasies  about  his  unique  origin  as  a  descendent  of  gods,  made 
master  of  a  world  graciously  created  for  his  enjoyment  and 
fulfillment.  Shattering this wishful .thinking,  Darwin developed 
the  ideas  of Anaximander,  Lamarck, ·and his  own  grandfather, 
Erasmus, and proposed the doctrine of evolution. The different 
forms  of  life  developed  gradually  from  a  common  ancestry 
through a struggle for existence and survival of the fittest.  Homo 
sapiens was not created de  novo by special design and was  only 
the remarkable product of a long process of biological evolution. 
Man is different from monkeys and lizards,  just as  monkeys and 
lizards  differ  from  worms  and  amoebas. · All  are  links  in  the 
evolutionary  process.  A  biological  memory  of ancient  times  is 
preserved  as  functional  traces  in higher organisms.  The chem 
ical composition  of  the  blood  of  mammals,  for ·example,  has 

lllll 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

a strong resemblance to sea water where life probably originated. 
Antecedents of a thinking brain may be found in lower animals, 
and in varying degrees,  mental abilities like memory,  learning, 
and  problem  solving  are  shared  by octopus,  rat,  and  man.  By 
accepting this  reality we can perceive our continuing evolution 
and  become  more  motivated  to  influence  the  destiny  of  the 
human race. 

We  may  now  be  approaching  a  third  equally  momentous 
discovery  about  ourselves.  The analysis  of mental  activities  in 
the  context  of  brain  physiology  indicates  that  our  own  self, 
our ego, is not so unique or even independent, as Freud pointed 
out many years ago. Study of the elements which constitute per 
sonal  identity  reveals  the  two  classical  factors  of  nature  and 
nurture.  These  factors  are  given  to,  and  not  chosen  by,  the 
individual. The amino acids which form  the genes are  selected 
and  assembled  in  the  helix  by  natural  chance,  without  inter 
vention of the desires of the owner or the donors, and according 
to laws  related to  the history  of protozoas,  fishes,  and apes,  be 
yond  the  control  or awareness  of  man.  Genetically  we  are  not 
the masters but the slaves  of millenniums of biological  history. 
The other factors which form  personality originate in the en 
vironment and are initially received by each  baby without any 
possible choice.  The baby does not select his parents, country of 
birth, or the language spoken around him. Personality is formed 
by a  constellation of borrowed elements related  to  ideological, 
behavioral, and cultural systems, and dependent on a continuous 
stream of sensory inputs.  This is  reality,  and we  must accept  it 
and adapt to it.  Only then can we  apply our intelligence to the 
investigation  and  conquering of  the  human  mind.  Only  then 
can  we  contemplate  development  of  a  future  psychocivilized 
human being, a less cruel; happier, and better man. The concept 
of individuals as self-sufficient and independent entities is based 
on false  premises. 

In  the  Copernican  universe,  our  planet  and  man  himself 
were demoted from their original geocentric position, but there 
was  still  a  comfortable  sensation  of security  based  on  law  and 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comSOCIAL  DEPENDENCE  AND  INDIVIDUAL  FREEDOM 

233 

order,  and  as  Newton  explained,  the  most  complex  celestial 
phenomena  could  in  fact  be  reduced  to  relatively  simple  for 
mulas.  Similar laws could be applied to falling  apples  or to  the 
attraction  and  repulsion  of planets  floating  in  the  immensity 
of sidereal  space.  Reality,  however,  was  still  more complex and 
less  stable,  and  a  new  understanding  of  the  universe  was  pro 
vided  by  the  quantum  theory  of  Planck  and  the  uncertainty 
principle  of  Heisenberg,  culminating in  the  ideas  of  relativity 
formulated  by  Einstein.  Time  and  distance  lost  their  former 
absolute  values  and  appeared  to  have  a  different  meaning  to 
different observers. 

The problem is  that the universe has no center. Everything is 
relative and all that we can do is  to compare the relations among 
given  sets  of  values  and  express  the  result  by  mathematical 
formu~as. If the  size  of  all  existing  materials  in  the  earth  was 
suddenly reduced (or increased)  100 times (or any other amount), 
no human being would be able to detect the spectacular change 
because of the lack of units of .reference.  Two cars  traveling at 
the same speed are motionless with respect to each other.  While 
inside  a  jet  airplane  flying  at  1,000  kilometers  per  hour,  we 
may  take  a  slow  walk down  the aisle  at a  speed of  1  meter  per 
second.  To say  then  that  we  are  moving  at  1,003.6  kilometers 
per hour would  be  meaningless  unless  we  specified  our  points 
of reference. We do not have any absolute and immutable yard 
stick.  The limitation of  the  world  of  physics  is  that  it can  be 
perceived  only  as  the  relativity  of  one  value  compared  with 
another. 

These well-known  concepts  of  physics  have  a  direct  applica 
tion  to  the  understanding of mental functions,  to  which  some 
absolute  values  were  erroneously  attributed  in  the  past.  The 
mind also  lacks  a  center,  and  in reality  its  functions  are  based 
on the relativistic comparison of information which has not been 
created by cerebral neurons but which originates in the environ 
ment and  is  perceived  through  sensory  reception  of  data  as  a 
temporal sequence of experiences which are processed  by cere 
bral neurons and stored, to be used as future frames of reference. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL OF THE  MIND 

234 
Mter all,  the acceptance ofrelativity in physics is only a  conse 
quence of the physiological properties of OUT- brain, which lacks 
the  intrinsic  capability  for absolute  measurement  of  time  or 
space. 

We must formulate similar questions inpsychology, knowing 
that the brainisnot able t:o prOduce absolute thoughts, to create 
absolute values, or to unveil intrinsic principles of ethics. There 
is a  psychological relativity parallel to the physical one) and our 
task  is  not  to discover  "true" . personalities,  because  the  search 
for absolute val-ues is fantasy, btit rather to investigate the origin, 
reception,  intracerebral  circulation,  and  behavioral  manifesta 
tions  of  the  sets  of  values  which  form  the  relative  frame  of 
reference of each individual.  The importance  of this  approach 
is  that  in  rejecting  the  immutability of values  we  also  reject 
the  fatal  detetniination  of  destiny,  and  instead  of  accepting 
natural  fate,  we  may  gain  a  new  personal  freedom  by  using 
intelligence,  considering that  the . sy-Stems- of  ideology  and  be 
havioral reactivity are only relative htiman creations which can 
be modified by the feedback 6f reason. 

Man  may  be  totisidered  a:  provisional  collection  of  matter 
and  information,  ·both  provided  by  the  environment,  consti 
tuting relative  frames of reference  to  be compared,  within  the 
limitations and under the terms of -the human mind, with other 
frames of reference. 

We know  that atoms of oxygen,  carbon,  hydrogen,  nitrogen, 
and other  elements  which  form  part of organic  and  inorganic 
compounds, such as water, vegetables, and animal proteins, have 
been  combined  in  a  special manner  to  constitute  membranes, 
cells, and other parts of living beings, without the help of "vital 
spirits" or oth'er metaphysical mysteries.  Our living body is only 
a transitory organization of chemical compounds. We may place 
a  radioactive  tag · in sodium or potassium  ions,  to  follow  their 
metabolic  pathways  as  they  etiter  the  body,  circulate  through 
it,  take  part in specific  activities,  and ate stored in  some ·organ 
or  excreted  to  the  outside,  Every  single  ion  which  forms  our 
flesh  pre-existed  in  nature;  A -small  number of  them,  a  minor 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comSOCIAL  DEPENDENCE  AND  INDIVIDUAL  FREEDOM 

~35 

fraction of the immense total, form part of each organism during 
its relatively briefspan of existence, and all of these  "personal" 
atoms, which in reality lack any individual specificity, will revert 
back to the environment. Atoms, organization, and time are the 
only factors which constitute the organisms, and nobody should 
be disturbed  or offended  by  the  fact  that  he  has  not invented 
or  consciously  chosen  the  ions  that  integrate  his  anatomical 
structure.  It is  true  that  the  astonishing  unique  properties  of 
awareness,  thinking, and behaving are new qualities which  did 
not exist among the properties of the single ions,  and that their 
appearance  is  related to  a  tremendously· complex  organization 
which we  still do not comprehend.  In order to understand and 
accept  this  fact  it  may  be  helpful  to  consider  that  water  has 
different  physical  and chemical  properties  than  its  constituent 
elements of hydrogen and oxygen.  The complexity of organiza 
tion  may determine the emergence of new properties nonexist 
ent in the simpler building blocks. 

To establish a  psychophysical  parallel,  we  may>consider  that 
words,  concepts,  information,  patterns  of ·response,  and  other 
elements  indispensable  for  mental  activities  pre-exist  in  cul 
ture  before  each  individual  is  born.  These elements  enter  the 
organism  by  impinging on  sensory  inputs,  and  then  circulate 
through  the  central  nervous  system,  taking  part  in  specific 
mental activities and finally being stored as  memories and per 
haps  exteriorized  as  part of behavioral  expression.  The gamut 
of  words,  symbols,  and  information  necessary  for  ideological 
processes  must be provided from  the  outside,  and only a  small 
portion  of  the  existing  immensity  is  used  tq  structure  the  in 
dividual  mind.  No  one  should  be  disturbed  by  the  fact  that 
he is borrowing most of his mental constituents and that he has 
not invented the alphabet, mathematics,  ethics,  history,  or any 
of the many subjects filling our .brains. 

We  are  provided  with  frames  of mental  reference  and  by 
necessity our reactions-and personal  identity~will be  related 
to this given frame.  Individual uniqueness is merely the unique 
chance  in  the  acquisition,  combination,  and  modulation  of 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

available  elements,  and  the  relative  central  axis  is  not  the  in 
dividual  but  the  elements  originating  in  the  outside.  There 
is not much more merit-or responsibility-in learning to walk 
or in speaking our native  tongue than there is  in growing hair. 
Unless  we are taught to think with critical  evaluation of the 
perceived reality and we understand the principle of psychologi 
cal  relativity,  it will  be  very  difficult  to  escape  from  the  ideo 
logical  and  behavioral  imprinting  of  early  childhood.  The 
individual  may  think  that  the  most  important  fact  of  reality 
is  his own existence, but this is  only his  personal  point of view, 
a  relative  frame  of  reference  which  is  not  shared  by  the  rest 
of  the  living  world.  This  self-importance  also  lacks  historical 
perspective,  for  the  brief  existence  of  one  person  should  be 
considered in terms of the world population, mankind, and the 
whole  universe.  It is  quite  reasonable  to  feel  that  "I"  am  the 
most  important creature  that ever  existed,  but  unless  I  realize 
the  egocentric  relativity  of  my  appreciation _ at  the  same  time, 
I  am ignoring many other frames of reference, as valuable as  my 
own,  which  are  essential  in  order  to  understand  my  position 
both  among  other  living  beings  and  in  the  context  of  cosmic 
evolution.  Understanding  of  the  relative  value  of  personal 
existence  from  the  individual  and  cosmic  points  of  view  as 
complementary  aspects  of  the  same  reality  may  facilitate  the 
personal  adaptation  to  the  environment.  It  may  also  provide 
feedback  possibilities of influencing this reality by using intelli 
gent purpose  to  modify natural causality. 

In Sartre's (194)  dualism of being-in-itself (a  stone is  a  stone, 
which  being static  always  coincides  with  itself)  and  being-for 
itself  (the  realm  of  consciousness  perpetually  beyond  itself), 
the  second  aspect  represents  our  existence  as  continuously 
flowing out, preventing us from possessing our being the way we 
can  possess  a  static  object;  and  creating  the  essential  conflict 
and  anxiety  over  our  desire  for  the  security  of  being  a  stable 
entity.  This  important  concept  should  be  supplemented  by 
recognition  of  the  essential  need  for  a  continuous  flowing  in 
of  sensory inputs.  Self-realization,  after  all,  derives  from  the 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comSOCIAL  DEPENDENCE  AND  INDIVIDUAL  FREEDOM 

237 

processing  of  information  coming  from  the  environment,  and 
accomplishment  is  a  feedback  which  establishes  a  congruence 
between  a  drive  and  the  sensory  perception  of  a  behavioral 
performance.  The existential flowing out cannot occur without 
a  previous  flowing  in,  and  what  flow  in  and  out  are  merely 
information,  cultural  symbols,  and  behavioral  patterns  created 
not by the individual but by the collective effort of many men 
most  of  them  dead-accumulated  through  many  thousands 
of years  and graciously given  to each of us. 

A  clearer  understanding  of  our  continuous  environmental 
and social  dependence  will  incrc:!ase  our interest  in identifying 
and  investigating  the  factors,  reasons,  and  mechanisms  of  this 
dependence.  Realization  that  the  elements  which  form  our 
personality  and  originate  in  the  surroundings  are  so  essential 
may  promote  the  establishment  of  stronger  intellectual  and 
emotional  bonds  with  the  cultural  source,  increasing  our  mo 
tivation  to  enhance  the  environment  which  is  the  provider  of 
our  personal  building  blocks.  Social  integration  may  be  im 
proved  when  it  is  understood  that· society  forms  the  basis  of 
each  individual  and  that  personal  destiny  is  related  to  and  in 
large part dependent on the destiny of the whole group. Aliena 
tion from established cultural forms  and lack of social responsi 
bility  could  be  diminished  by  an  increased  awareness  of  our 
social  dependence. 

In  primitive  societies  there  was  a  limited  choice  of  sensory 
inputs,  provided  mainly  by  surrounding  nature.  As  man  was 
bound to a  small piece of territory, he had very few  opportuni 
ties  for  ecological,  sociological,  or ideological  change,  and  nat 
ural chance was  the principle source of information.  In present 
civilized  societies,  many  sensory  inputs  originate  in  the  tech 
nological  surroundings  created  by  man.  Because  of  mass  com 
munications,  important  events  are  shared  around  the  world. 
The tragic death of one man,  once an incident of local  signifi 
cance,  may now be reported globally and felt as  a  personal loss 
by  millions  of  distant  people.  The  work . of  one  person  who 
discovers electricity or antibiotics may now transform the quality 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

of life in all countries. Different technologies, arts, sciences, and 
political  and religious  ideologies  affect  the  lives  of :most  men. 
In  principle,  adults  can  select  their country,  climate,  and  cul 
ture  and  any setting  from  the  sensory  isolation  of  a  psycholo 
gist's experi:rnental cubicle to the sensory assault of a metropolis. 
But  the desires  and  mechanisms  for  choice  are  determined 
mainly by early childhood experiences, cultural imprinting, and 
learned  patterns  of  response.  Newborn  babies  are  completely 
dependent  on  parental  care  for  the  quality  and  quantity  of 
sensory  inputs  as  well  as  for  food  and  warmth.  The  elements 
offered by the environ:rnent are almost infinite, but only a limited 
number are  used  to  structure -each  individual.  Their selection 
depends  on  chance,  which  among many variables  includes  the 
presence and behavior of parents and teachers.  We must recog 
nize  that initially an individual has no control over the sensory 
inputs  which  mold  his  mind,  and  that  during  the  decisive 
years  of  childhood,  when  each  of  us  receives  emotional  im 
pacts,  behavioral  formulas,  and  ideological  frameworks,  we  are 
unable  to  search  independently  for  alternatives.  Our  initial 
personality  is  structured  in  a  rather  automatic  way  when  our 
capacity  for  intelligent choice  has  not  developed. 

If we  accept  that  early  experience  is  decisive  for  the  es 
tablishment  of  personal  identity,  then  we  must  accept  that 
individual  mental  structure  is  not  self-determined  but  hetero 
deter:rnined  by  the  interaction  of  genes  received  from  our  an 
cestors  and  information -received  from  the  environment  and 
culture.  Where,  then,  is  the  freedom  to  construct  personal 
identity?  To  clarify  these  ideas,  let  us  remember  that  liberal 
societies are based on the principle of individual self-determina 
tion,  with  the  assumption  that each  human  being  is  born  free 
and has the right to develop his own mind, to construct his own 
ideology,  to shape his  own behavior,  and  to express  his  person 
ality  without  external  pressures  or  indoctrination.  The  role 
of  education,  which  involves  both  parents  and  schools,  is  to 
help these  processes  evolve  with due respect  for  the  individual. 
One of  the main  goals  in  these  societies  is  "to find  ourselves," 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comSOCIAL  DEPENDENCE  AND  INDIVJDUAL  FREEDOM 

2 39 

and  to  develop  our  potential  while  remaining  independent 
and self-sufficient.  Privacy has a  high priority in it$  intellectual, 
emotional,  material,  and  territorial  aspects,  and  personal  free 
dom stops with interference in the rights of others. 

This  kind  of  liberal  orientation  has  great  appeal,  but  un 
fortunately  its  assumptions  are  not  supported by  neurophysio 
logical  and  psychological  studies  of  intracerebral  mechanisms. 
The brain of the newborn  lacks  the  stored  information,  neur 
ronal  circuits,  and  functional  keyboards.  prerequisite  to  the 
formulation of choice. The infant may have the right to be free, 
but  he  has  neither  the  option  nor  the  biological  mechanisms 
for  free  behavior.  Confrontation with a  multiplicity of choices 
may  create  confusion and anxiety  in a  child wl:to ·does  not  yet 
possess  the  necessary  mental·  sophistication  to  choose.  This 
frustrating  situation of inadequacy  may  have  a  traumatic  and 
deforming  effect  rather than  a  constructive  and  positive  one. 
The  brain  of  an adult. usually  possesses  the  capacity  to  select 
a  response  but even  it is  not self-sufficient;  for the brain needs 
constant  environmental  inputs  in  .order  to  preserve  mental 
normality, and a  flow  of information  is  necessary to make each 
judgment against the background of experience. 

The  decisive  importance  of  children's  education  has  been 
recognized  in  pedagogy,  psychology,  and  sociology,  and  the 
permissive or authoritarian orientation  has  been  a  highly  con 
troversial  subject.  Wjthout  entering  directly .into  this  debate, 
I  would like to  point out the fallacy  in the theory that permis 
siveness develops the "true" and "free" personality of the child. 
Permissiveness,  like any  other educational  approach  to  human 
relations,  imposes a  type of response • which  influences  the . pro 
cessing of sensory.  inputs and establishes. a  pattern of behavior. 
Education  has  consequences  predictable  within  a  range  of 
variability.  Obviously if we were not expecting some result,  we 
would not educate. We may argue that the personality developed 
through  permissiveness  is. better  adapted  to  present  times,  or 
that it will  have  less-or more-psychological  and  social  con 
flicts.  We  should  understand,  however,  tl:tat  a  permissively 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

structured child is as much the product of his parents' manipu 
lation as  the child of the most authoritarian mother. The choice 
is  the  parents', not the child's. 

The brain,  per se,  with  all its  genes,  is  not sufficient  for  the 
development of a mind in the absence of external  information, 
and the content of this  information is  decisive  in the establish 
ment  of  mental  structure.  Even  the  withdrawal  of  parental 
care  is  a  factor  which  can  irrevocably  shape  future  behavior 
of  the  young;  as  demonstrated  by  Harlow's  neurotic  mother 
less  monkeys  and  by  the  emotional  and  mental  handicap  suf 
fered  by homeless children. 

· When  a  parent  passively  accepts  violent  behavior,  insulting 
words,  or  physical  assault  from  his  child,  he  is  positively  rein 
forcing this kind of reaction and is facilitating the establishment 
of aggressive  patterns which  may be generalized  to  other social 
situations  later  on.  While  physical  aggression  is  rare  in  four 
year  olds,  by  six  years  of  age  a  child  has  developed  sufficient 
motor  skills  and  curiosity  to  engage  in  social  interaction  and 
competition  with  his  peers.  Studies  have  shown  that  at  this 
point  intermittent  or  differential  reinforcing  of  antisocial 
behavior  is  the most  effective  method for  establishing  patterns 
of  aggr~ssion (g).  Some  tendencies  are  inborn,  but  the  quality 
and quantity of their expression depend on experience.  Repres 
sion of violence may create undesirable conflicts and frustrations 
only when  the  pattern of violence  has  already  been created  by 
previous learning. A basic inborn drive like sex is a  blind force 
dependent  on  symbols,  experience,  and  cultural  patterns  of 
response. 

Whatever we do or fail to do when we are in charge of a baby 
will  influence  his  future  mental  structure.  Our attitude,  there 
fore,  should  not  be  to  close  our  eyes  and  accept  chance,  but 
to  investigate  the  extracerebral  and  intracerebral  elements 
which  intervene  in  the  formation  of  personality.  To  study 
what  is  going on  inside  of . the  brain is  as  important as  to  con 
sider  the other aspects  of education  and  behavior. 

These  remarks  are  intended  both  to  demonstrate  that  we 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comSOCIAL  DEPENDENCE  AND  INDIVIDUAL  FREEDOM 

241 

should not base our interpersonal relations on false or unproved 
assumptions  and  to  indicate  the  need  to  study  these  problems 
experimentally  within  the  framework  of  intracerebral  physi 
ology.  As  our power to  influence  the  mental  structure  of  man 
continually increases,  we face  the  question  of the  kind  of  peo 
ple we  would like  to  create.  We  must realize  that  parents  and 
educators  are  imprinting  and · manipulating  the  minds  and 
personalities  of  young  people  in  any  case,  and  that  we  are 
responsible for giving coherent form and ethical purpose to the 
psychogenetic  elements  transmitted  to  the  child.  The  issue  is 
whether violence and other behavioral  patterns are inborn and 
inevitable  or  whether  they  are  mainly  related  to  a  cultural 
learning which may be influenced by intelligent planning. 

Ecological  forces  cannot  be  ignored or destroyed.  Liberation 
from and domination of the environment became possible when 
we  discovered  the  laws  of  nature  and  directed  them  with  our 
intelligence.  We cannot ignore  the biological  laws  of  the mind 
either.  We  should  use  our  intelligence  to  direct  our  behav 
ior,  rather  than  accept  its  determination  by  unknown  forces. 
Through  education  we  should  provide  awareness  of  the  ele 
ments,  including  intracerebral  mechanisms,  which  intervene 
in the formation  of personal  identity,  and we  should  teach  the 
processes  of  decision-making  and  intelligent  choice.  Personal 
freedom  is  not a  biological  gift  but  a  mental  attribute  which 
must  be  learned  and  cultivated.  To  be  free  is  not  to  satisfy 
sexual  drive,  to  fill  an  empty stomach,  or  to  quarrel  with  our 
wives  because of our repressed  fears  or mother-infant relations. 
Freedom requires the recognition of biological drives and their 
intelligent direction through processes of sublimation,  substitu 
tion,  postponement,  or  simply  their  satisfaction  with  civilized 
refinement  and  enjoyment.  Individual  freedom  will  increase 
when  we  understand  the  setting  of  our  personality  in  early 
childhood  and  when  we  develop  means  for  the  intelligent 
evaluation  and  emotional  interpretation  of  the  information 
reaching  us  from  the  environment. 

We  should  try  to  establish,  at  the  earliest  possible  moment 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com242 

PHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

of the baby's life,  a  program of psychogenesis,  meaning the  use 
of available physiological,  psychological,  and psychiatric knowl 
edge  for  the  formation  of  the  child's  personality.  Courses  on 
psychogenesis should be taken by parents and educators as  well 
as  by children as a part of the school curriculum. The postulates 
of psychogenesis are:  (1) The mind does not exist at the moment 
of birth.  (2)  The mind cannot appear in the absence  of sensory 
inputs.  (3)  Individual  identity  and  personal  behavior  are  not 
properties of the brain which will unfold automatically through 
neuronal maturation, but are acquired functions which must be 
learned  and  therefore  depend  essentially  on  the  reception  of 
sensory  inputs.  (4)  The  purpose  of  education  is  not  the  un 
veiling  of  individual  mental  functions  but  the  creation,  the 
genesis  of  them.  (5)  Symbols  from  the  environment  will  be 
physically  integrated within the  brain  as  molecular  changes  in 
the neuronal structure. (6)  Man is not born free but subservient 
to  genes  and  education.  (7)  Personal  freedom  is  not  inherited 
nor is  it a  gift of nature, but one of the highest attainments of 
civilization which requires awareness and intellectual and emo 
tional  training  in order  to  process  and  choose  consciously  and 
intelligently  among  environmental  alternatives.  (8)  Education 
should  not  be  authoritarian  because  then  mental  flexibility  is 
reduced,  handicapping  creativity  and  forcing  behavioral  con 
formity  or  producing  hyperreactive  rejection  and  rebellion. 
Education should  not be  permissive  either,  because  then  other 
kinds  of automatisms  are  being developed,  determined  by  the 
blind  chance  of  environmental  circumstances.  In  a  permissive 
atmosphere,  the individual may be a  slave  of his own emotions, 
while  an  authoritarian  upbringing  creates  a  tyranny  of  in 
hibitions  and  conformism.  Both  extremes  are  undesirable  and 
it  is  preferable  to  direct  mental  and  behavioral  development 
toward a self-determination of goals,  knowing that if we want to 
create  free  individuals,  we  must  teach  them  to  be  so  (210). 
Understanding  of  the  cerebral  mechanisms  involved  in  behav 
ioral  responses  provides a  feedback  which  modifies  these  mech 
anisms,  introducing  elements  of  conscious  determination. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com243 
SOCIAL  DEPENDENCE  AND  INDIVIDUAL  FREEDOM 
In . re(:ent  generations,  there .has .been an  anxious  search  for 
freedom  and  personal  identity,  an  attempt to  escape  from the 
faceless  mass  of a . technological  society,anda rebellion  against 
traditional morality, ·· ethical  prindples,  and _ ideological  cliches. 
In  this  challenge to  established  values,  sensory stimulation  has 
grown louder, men's hair longer, s.kir(:S shorter, and rebellion has 
become  the goal-to be free  fromf;unily,  teachers,  and society; 
to let the mind float, searching for •the .depth of the self;  perhaps 
with  psychedelic  aids, ,perceiving a  stream  of uninhibited mes, 
sages  and  dreams;  to live  a  natural life  witho4t  the artificial 
pressures of schedules and obligations;  to have free  speech,  free 
expression;  artistic  creativity without  established  rules,  and  a 
multiperception.of feelings fioodirtgthe senses. 

In this attitude, whiCh is  responsible for many of tne present 
conflicts  and  maladjustments, •tllere -is  a  fu.lll;lcy  similar  to  the 
fallacy of permissive education. We cannot be fre{from parents, 
teachers,  and society  because they  are the extl<lcerebral  sources 
of our minds,  and .to ·resent or-denythisrealityisnot·going  to 
change it. A young person can-be: pto1,1d ofw6rJ.dt)g hard, but he 
canilot  take  credit for- being  smart:  studi~s have  shown  that 
IQ is  determined bythe envirorunen:t, and that the intellectual 
and  motor  skills  required  for  success  must  be  taught  by  the 
guardians  of childhood.  The  persistence of dependence  on an 
initial source of emotions and infJrroatioh, like the mother, can 
be  undesirable,  but this  problem ·shouldnot be  confused  with 
the  existence  of bonds  and education provided by  the  mother 
· 
and by society. 

We may disagree with the system of values and ideology given 
to  us,  and subsequently we  may  espouse. a  different philosophy 
and try to assume anotheridentity. Greatalterations are possible, 
and we  may cherish o.r curse our past,  but its cultural elements 
will be forever our frame of reference. In the depth of our minds 
we  are  going  to  discover  only  the  remains  of  what  we  have 
learned and experienced. 

· 
The young Americans who have taken refuge in Ibiza or Crete 
seldom identify  with  the  customs  or ideology  of  their  adopted 

· 

.. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

244 
lands. They enjoy nature but do not participate in local culture. 
They admit  to  feeling  "American,"  although  they  may  reject 
the  present  economic  or  political  values  of  the  United  States. 
Their  basic  emotional  patterns  of  response  were  established 
during early childhood and their later changes are limited. This 
fact is in part related to the progressive loss of neuronal plasticity 
through age. 

The old temple inscription "Know Thyself" is often repeated 
today,  but perhaps it is  not adequate.  It should  declare  "Con 
struct  Thyself"  as  well.  Shape  your  mind,  train  your  thinking 
power, and direct your emotions more rationally;  liberate your 
behavior from  the  ancestral  burden of reptiles and  monkeys 
be a man and use your intelligence to orient the reactions of your 
mind. 

The human being is a functional trinity of sensory inputs and 
behavioral  responses  connected  by  the  essential  link  of  intra 
cerebral processes.  The three aspects  are equally essential,  even 
if only the first two were considered important in the past. Today 
we  have  begun  to unravel  the secrets of cerebral  activities,  and 
a  new  perspective  for  the  understanding  of  man  is  emerging 
from  the experimental complexities of neurobehavioral data. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com25 

Natural Causality  and Intelligent  Planning 

in  the  Organization of Human Behavior 

Perhaps  the  most  important  quality  of  civilization  is  the  sub 
stitution of intelligent planning for  natural chance.  Today our 
lives are  not regulated  by hunting needs,  darkness  of night,  or 
seasonal  variations.  We  may  request  food  by  telephone,  flip  a 
switch for  light, or adjust a  dial  to obtain a  room  temperature. 
At  the  same  time  that  we  have  gained  freedom  from  natural 
elements,  we  have  become  increasingly  dependent  on  coor 
dinated technical planning. The accomplishments in outer space 
travel are an outstanding example. Escape from gravity abolished 
man's historical bond to the earth;  day and night rhythms were 
drastically  changed;  time  and  space  took  on  new  dimensions; 
the  horizon  vanished;  the  cardinal  points  lost  meaning,  and  a 
totally  new  system  of . references  and  computations  had  to  be 
created  in  order  to  navigate  and  survive  orbiting  around  and 
beyond the earth.  It is  symbolic  that man's new-found  celestial 
freedom  required  the  greatest  imaginable  social  dependence. 
Every single bit of each space vehicle represented  the combined 
thinking and material efforts of thousands of men. Even the air to 
be  breathed  inside  the  capsule  had  to  be  carefully  calculated 
and stored; 

Manipulation of natural elements for  the benefit of mankind 
is  usually accepted as  highly desirable, and most of us are rather 
proud  of  the  colossal  engineering  efforts  involved  in  changing 

245 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

the course of a river, joining oceans formerly separated by land, 
or reaching distant  stars  with  our  instruments.  These  wonder 
ful  realities are considered a  logical consequence of our present 
cultural  system,  although  they  would  have  been  impossible  to 
materialize  or even  to  conceive  of  several  thousand  years  ago. 
Can we  imagine the attitude of primitive man about tampering 
with  the  eternal  stability  of  the  rivers  or  about  capturing  the 
sparks of lightning with a  metallic  rod?  The suggestion  would 
have been rejected as foolish and impossible, if not sacrilegious. 
"Reaching for the moon" was  the expression for  striving for  an 
unattainable  goal,  although  that  actual  goal  has  now  been 
realized. 

We  may  wonder  whether  man's  still  ingrained  conceptions 
about  the  untouchable self  are  not reminiscent  of  the  ancient 
belief that it was  completely beyond human power to alter om 
nipotent nature.  We are at  the  beginning of a  new ideological 
and  technological  revolution  in  which  the  objectives  are  not 
physical  power and  control  of  the  environment,  but  direct  in 
tervention  into the fate  of man  himself. 

The fact that the human brain is learning to influence its own 
material  and functional  substratum  should  not  be  interpreted 
as  a  foolish  attempt  to  modify  "cosmic  design,"  or  to  change 
"God's will," but simply as  the appearance of a  new mechanism 
determined by the normal evolution of natural chance.  Human 
domination of ecological forces  should not be taken as  a  victory 
against  natural  fate  but as  a  result of it,  in  the  same  way  that 
the flight  of a  bird against gravity  is  not in defiance of physical 
laws.  Nature,  not  man,  deserves  credit  for  creating a  thinking 
brain.  Natural  evolution  provided  the  cerebral  properties  of 
originality,  foresight,  and awareness.  The process  was  probably 
comparable  to  the  needs  of  warm-blooded  animals  which  re 
quired the development of a neuronal thermostat, located in the 
hypothalamus,  in  order  to  regulate  complex  vasomotor  and 
metabolic mechanisms to keep body temperature within narrow 
limits.  The newcomer in the series of warm mammals seems  to 
be developing a  novel  and most  useful  homeostatic  mechanism 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comNATURAL  CAUSALITY  AND  INTELLIGENT  PLANNING  247 

which  in  the  future  will  perhaps  be  referred  to  as  the  "psy 
chostat,"  meaning  the  intelligent  neuronal  adaptation  for  the 
maintenance of mental  stability in spite  of changes  in external 
and  internal  demands.  Natural  evolution  should  favor  the  de 
velopment of this mechanism which certainly has greatsurvival 
value  in  the  present  world  of  tensions  and  conftict_s.  Natural 
evolution is,  however,  too slow, and if we recognize  the deCisive 
importance of the new development, we may be able to facilitate 
the feedback  of cognitive behavior upon  its  own material  basis 
of cerebral physiology. 

When  atomic  energy  was  discovered,  its  destructive  capa 
bilities  were  developed  much  faster  than  its  constructive  ap 
plications, and the blame for  this tragedy must be placed on the 
lack of human reason~n the functional inadequacy of our little 
brains  which  have  not  yet  learned  to  solve  their  behavioral 
conflicts  reasonably.  The  danger  of  atomic  misuse  may,  hope 
fully,  be solved by new ideas produced by better brains to come, 
while  the risks  derived from  behavioral control may  be created 
and  at  the  same  time  avoided  by  the  same  subject  of inquiry, 
the  mind,  which  contains  within  itself  all  the · elements  for 
search and for decision and cannot expect any external help.  As 
Dobzhansky (65)  has said, "In giving rise to man,  the evolution 
ary  process  has,  apparently  for  the  first  and only  time  in  the 
history of the Cosmos,  become conscious ofit:Self.  This opens at 
least  a  possibility  that  evolution inay  Sc>me  day  be  directed  by 
man, and that prevalence of the absurd may be cut down." 

The  phrase  "control  of  human  behavior"  is  emotionally 
loaded,  in part because of its  threat  to  the  "inviolability of the 
ego"  and  in  part  because  of  unpleasant  associations  with  dic 
tatorships, brainwashing, and selfish  exploitation of man. Well 
known  novels  like  Huxley's  Brave  New  World  (1 i4),  Orwell's 
rg84  (168),  and  Condon's  The  Manchurian  Candidate  (40)  are 
exposes of utopian societies  with obedient, soma-druned,  satis 
fied individuals whose activities are planned by the master minds 
of  the  ruling  council.  These  satires  are  meant  to  shock  the 
reader,  but other novels  also  based  on cultural · design  and  be-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

havioral  engineering,  such  as  Skinner's  Walden  Two  (2og), 
have  more  messianic  tones.  The  problem  of  external  controls 
was  well  expressed  by  Skinner  (uo)  when  he  described 

a  world  in which  there  is  food,  clothing,  and  shelter  for  all,  where 
everyone  chooses  his  own  work  and  works  on  the  average  only  4 
hours  a  day,  where  music  and  the  arts  flourish,  where  personal  re 
lationships  develop  under  the  most  favorable  circumstances,  where 
education  prepares  every  child  for  the  social  and  intellectual  life 
which  lies  before  him,  where-in  short-people  are  truly  happy, 
secure,  productive,  creative,  and  forward  looking.  What  is  wrong 
with  it?  Only  one  thing:  someone  "planned  it  that  way." 

The concern about external planning depends to a great extent 
on  learned  attitudes,  and  the  circular  problem  is  that  arbiters 
of  ethical  values  are  so  biased  by  ideas  of  the  prevailing,  self 
perpetuating cultural system  that  they  cannot  objectively  eval 
uate  their  own  evaluations.  To  own  slaves  was  considered  a 
respectable  manifestation  of social  status  not  too  long ago.  In 
culcation  of  honesty,  loyalty,  bravery,  and  self-sacrifice  is  the 
custom  in many cultures,  but  by  adding  obedience  and  mobi 
lizing the population for aggressive action against other groups, 
all  these excellent qualities are perverted. 

The dangers  inherent in the  control  of human  behavior  are 
recognized by Skinner as  well as  by most investigators,  and the 
hope  that  the  new  power  acquired  by  the  behavioral  sciences 
will  be  restricted  to  the  scientists  or  to  some  benevolent  elite 
is  little  supported  by  either recent  or distant  history.  Faith  in 
science  has  been shattered when  the  stupendous  discoveries  of 
physics  have  been  applied  to  kill  several  hundred  thousand 
human beings in a single blow, when teams of investigators have 
been applying  their skills  to  find  more  efficient  napalm  oils  to 
bum  villages,  when  civilized  countries  are  stockpiling  deadly 
gases,  germs,  and  megatons  of  lethal  power,  and  when  govern 
mental  elites  are  using  computers  and  "think  centers"  to  cal 
culate  a  game of destruction and retaliation.  Greater  efficiency 
in behavioral control could be only a more subtle and dangerous 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comNATURAL  CAUSALITY -AND  INTELLIGENT  PLANNING  249 

weapon.  No  wonder  that  Berkner  (•5)  has  posed  the  question 
"Is  there  intelligent  life  on  earth?"  while  Cole  (38)  expressed 
universal  concern  by  asking,  "Can the world be saved?" 

These very serious problems must be recognized and solutions 
must be  found.  Danger has  never stopped progress;  the  risk  is 
not  in  the  acquisition of  knowledge  hut  in  its  improper  use; 
notwithstanding  problems  and  concerns,  atomic:  investigations 
will  continue  their  explosive  development,  and  control  of  hu 
man  behavior  will  advance  rapidly  in  methodology  and  ap 
plicability.  We  must  accept  the  reality  that  different  degrees 
of  behavioral  control  have  been  practiced  since  immemorial 
times, are widely used at present, and will expand in the future. 
Man  is  a  social  animal  and  interpersonal relations  are  a  form 
of mutual control. The mother certainly teaches ' her baby.  The 
policeman imposes order on city traffic.  To discuss  whether hu 
man  behavior  can  or  should  be  controlled ·_ is  naive  and  mis 
leading.  We  should  discuss  what  kinds of contr()ls  are  ethical, 
considering the efficiency and mechanisms of existing procedures 
and the desirable degree of these and other controls in the future. 
Available techniques can be classified in two ·groups:  (1)  Use 
of  chemical  and  physical  agents  to  induce  modifications  in 
neurophysiological activity. This category includes psychoactive 
drugs and direct electrical manipulation of the brain. (2)  Use of 
positive or negative social  reinforcements,  based on the sensory 
relations between the subject and his environment, mainly other 
human  beings  who  are  the  suppliers  of stimuli. This  category 
includes  subliminal  stimulation,  conditioning,  social  pressure, 
psychotherapy, hypnosis, sensory deprivation, and brainwashing. 
In these situations the behavior of one individual is  planned or 
at least  purposefully influenced  by another. 

In the control of behavior through psychotherapy,  the doctor 
uses  his  own  experience  and  scientific  knowledge . in  order  to 
influence  the reactions of the · patient who has consented  to  the 
general  procedure.  In  this  situation,  there  is  a communication 
of values and behavioral characteristics, and it has been pointed 
out  that  ''whether or not  the analyst  is  consciously  tempted to 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

act  as  a  teacher,  model  and ideal  to  his  patients,  he  inevitably 
does so  to a  greater or lesser extent;  and this  is  a  central aspect 
of the psychoanalytic process" (152). Patients who improve after 
psychotherapy  have  often  changed  their  moral  values  on  sex, 
aggression,  and authority to  conform  to  those  of  the  therapist, 
but there is much less modification in the patients who have not 
improved  (18g).  The  overwhelming  experimental  evidence 
shows  that human behavior can be controlled by psychological 
means  (131),  and  the  new  approach  of  physical  manipulation 
of the brain is  only one more aspect of possible behavioral con 
trol. 

The  widely  accepted  principle  that  "all  men  are  born  free 
and equal"  is  cherished as  the backbone of democratic societies 
and the basis of human dignity. If we  interpret the statement as 
an  ideal  for  social  organization  or  as  a  symbolic  expression  of 
human  rights,  the  principle  is  certainly  commendable.  If we 
analyze  its  biological  basis,  however,  we  realize  that  freedom 
of the newborn is only wishful thinking, and that literal accept 
ance of this fallacy may cause frustrations  and conflicts.  Expect 
ing  freedom,  we  may  be  puzzled  by ·the  reality  of  biological 
determination and early  imprinting compounded  by  the servi 
tude  to  a  mechanized  and  organized  society.  This  dilemma 
would be eased if we realized that liberty is not a natural, inborn 
characteristic  of . human expression  but a  product  of awareness 
and  intelligent  thinking which  must  be  acquired  by  conscious 
individual and collective efforts.  Civilization has accelerated the 
elaboration  of  human  potential  including  the  possibility  for 
greater freedom,  but its fulfillment  is  contingent on purposeful 
efforts  to  escape  from  the  countless  elements  of  behavioral 
determination. 

Heredity  is  established  by  pure  chance-not  chosen  by 
parents  or  by  the  individual-and  this  genetic  determination 
represents the potential to be a genius or an idiot.  Denying the 
existence of mental functions  in the newborn,  emphasizing the 
essentiality  of  extracerebral  elements  for  the  appearance  of 
the mind, and accepting that the baby lacks the capacity to search 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comNATURAL  CAUSALITY  AND  INTELLIGENT  PLANNING  251 

for and to choose the decisive initial inputs leads to the conclu 
sion of the possibility and convenience of intelligent planning as 
superior to  blind chance.  The poet needs  words-which he did 
not  invent-to  write  a  poem;  the  mason  needs  bricks,  con 
structed  by  someone  else,  to  build  a  house;  the  thinker  needs 
ideas, provided by readings and experience, in order to develop 
new  concepts;  and  the  baby,  who  is  the  first  state  of  poets, 
masons,  and  thinkers,  has  the  absolute  need  of cultural  inputs 
in order to become a  man. 

The  "personal  identity"  of  the  newborn  is  a  question  of 
definition,  because  initially  he  has  potentialities  rather  than 
realities.  Being  left- or  right-handed,  more  or  less  excitable, 
possessing a white or black skin, and the faculty--or inability 
to  learn  are  genetically  determined  characteristics.  After  the 
baby is born, the choices are:  who is going to provide the neces 
sary  information  and  training,  what  and  how  much  will  be 
provided, and the techniques to be used. The ideological vacuum 
of the  newborn brain cannot  be  filled  by  autochthonous neur 
onal  spikes  but by experiences and cultural  inputs.  The unfor 
tunate circumstance is that the baby, for whom the consequences 
of these choices are so important, is  totally unable to participate 
in the discussion. 

The  elements  which  form  the  frame  of  reference  for  in 
dividual  mental  structure  include,  among  others,  language, 
knowledge,  beliefs, and patterns of response,  but the number of 
existing cultural  elements  is  enormous  and  only  a  few  are  re 
ceived by each person. This requires a process of selection which 
is  influenced by  ( 1)  natural chance, represented, for example, by 
country  of  birth,  social  environment,  and  economic  factors; 
(2)  national  organization  which  uses  mass  media  to  commu 
nicate  facts,  news,  and  ideology  with  a  variable  degree  of  bias 
(and which also controls the educational system and may deprive 
people of specific knowledge and experiences by means of social 
and  political  pressure,  censorship,  and  repression);  (3)  family 
and  friends,  who  represent  the  most  important  sources  of  in 
formation  in  early  childhood;  and  (4)  the  individual  himself, 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

who may choose cultural elements, but only after he has acquired 
the power of reason and choice,  and within  the limits of avail 
able information. This power will be considerably biased by the 
three previous groups of factors. 

Let us accept that the structure of mental qualities and their 
behavioral  manifestations  depend  on  genetic,  neurophysiolog 
ical, and cultural factors which can be investigated, known, and 
modified  by . intelligent  planning.  Let  us  accept  also  that  the 
necessary  methodology  is  available  or  will  soon  be  developed. 
The  most  important  question  then  is  how  we  shall  use  this 
power.  How  should  the  human  mind  be  structured?  Which 
mental qualities and behavioral responses  should be favored or 
inhibited? Who will be the human artifact created by intelligent 
manipulation? As  Rogers  has  asked,  "Who will  be  controlled? 
Who  will  exercise  control?  What  type  of  control  will  be  ex 
ercised?  Most important of all ... toward what end or what pur 
pose, or in the pursuit of what value, will control be exercised?" 
(188). 

Powerful cultural determination is already being imposed on 
the behavior of children and adults,  but as  history shows  it has 
not been too successful in preventing or solving human conflicts. 
Our predicament is that the power to control behavior is progress 
ing very  rapidly  in  both  knowledge  and  technology,  while  we 
still  do  not know in which direction  to  use  it.  Skinner,  who  is 
the  main proponent of cultural  design,  has  listed  the specifica 
tions for a behavioral technology as  follows:  "Let men be happy, 
informed, skillful, well behaved, and productive" (210), but in a 
later publication  (211)  he  has  not  been so  definite  about these 
goals; and the implicit assumption is that behavioral control will 
bring "a far better world for everyone." 

The contention that an ideal society should be "well behaved" 
may be disputed by many and in any case requires a clarification 
of meaning.  In some  old  plantations slaves  behaved very  well, 
worked hard, were submissive  to their masters,  and were  prob 
ably  happier  than  some  of  the  free  blacks  in  modern  ghettos. 
In several dictatorial countries the general population is skillful, 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comNATURAL  CAUSALITY AND  INTELLIGENT  PLANNING  253 

productive, well behaved, and perhaps as happy as those in more 
democratic  societies.  It  is  doubtful,  however;  that  slavery or 
dictatorship should·be .our·models. Tooutlirtea formula for · the 
future ideal man is not easy.  This is ·partly due to the fact that if 
man  is  identified  by  his  mental  qualities,  our  difficulty  is  in 
creased  because  we  do not know these  qualities well,  and they 
are evolving entities with an unpredictable future .. How would 
it have been possible  we years ago to Jioresee the biological con 
venience  of resisting  radiation  or  gravitational  forces?  These 
concepts were beyond the thinking range of the epO<:h. How can 
we outline the mental requirements for a  n;tankind  in search of 
another planet to inhabit when  the earth loses  its wannth and 
can no longer support life? Our present pmblemis' fadrom dear 
although  it requires  immediate  action:  How should  we  orient 
human behavior in the present and · in the ne"t few' decades? 

The confusion about behavioral  goals  contrasts ·. sharply with 
the relative clarity of material needs. Food, clothing; and shelter 
may be accepted as the most basic requirements, to which we may 
add health,. education, and leisure. The puzzling teality .is  that 
the  excellent material accomplishment  of  our present  civiliza 
tion  has  not  only  failed  to  solve  human  conflicts  and  clashes 
but has increased their destructive eRiciency;:ctea.ting additional 
and  unexpected  problems  such  as  alienation  and  ecological 
pollution without  increasing  human  happiness.  The .new  gene 
erations of afHuent societies experience growing restlessness and 
escalating explosions  of rebellion whim may •· be interpreted as 
an  anxious  search  for  identity  and  purpose,  The complaint  is 
spiritual more than material, a  rejection of the established order 
with · its  "false" values,  without,  however,  teaching the creative 
crisis  of .a  better  cause.  It  is  a  wishfuL yearning  for  freedom 
while  remaining  chained to  behavioral patterns  of the  gtoup: 
contempt for . television, automobiles, and detergents;  contempt 
for affiliations  with the church,· state; or military.  This· attitude 
often leads the alienated to seek. sex  without love and the arti 
ficial  paradise  of  mental  distortion  provided· lt>y  drugs;  to ·live 
aimlessly  for  today  whi1e  feeling  the  emptiness  of  the  future. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

254 
They  search  for  the  independent  self  without  realizing  its 
essential  biological  and  ideological  dependence. 

Some of our present problems derive from the lack of balance 
between material and mental evolutions. We are civilized in our 
physical  ecological  accomplishments  but  barbaric  in  our  psy 
chological responses.  Within some limits we  can control atoms, 
trees,  and  animals,  while  we  have  not  learned  to  control  our 
selves.  New solutions are needed in order to civilize our psyche, 
consciously  to  organize  our efforts  to  develop  a  future  psycho 
civilized  society. 

Recognizing  that  we  must  do  something  in  order  to  under 
stand  the human mind better and  to  improve  the  human  con 
dition  is  not  very  original.  This  idea  was  expressed  before 
Platonic and Aristotelian times. What is surprising is the limited 
practicality  of  the  solutions  proposed  in  the  past.  Why  after 
several  thousand  years  of  civilization  are  human  beings  con 
tinuing to  torture and kill each other? Why do we agree in our 
efforts to understand and dominate natural forces,  while we dis 
agree on the organization of mankind? Why have some countries 
reached  a  considerable  degree  of physical  comfort  without  en 
joying a  comparable degree  of personal  happiness? 

One aspect of the  problem  is  certainly that  the many  factors 
involved  are  not  well  known  and  may  be  in  conflict.  Another 
is  that  philosophy,  sociology;  and  the  behavioral  sciences  have 
been limited to  the outside of organisms,  ignoring the  internal 
organization  which  is  responsible  for  behavioral  activity.  The 
tremendous  possibilities  introduced by new methodologies  will 
allow  the  exploration  of  the  depth  of  functioning  brains  and 
the  influencing  of  their  physiological  mechanisms.  Knowledge 
acquired through this approach will  permit a  more realistic and 
precise understanding of the human mind and of its  behavioral 
consequences,  and  it  will  also  permit  the  introduction  of  a 
greater  amount  of  awareness  and  intelligence  in  the  determi 
nation of behavioral  responses.  This orientation  should  not  be 
identified with  authoritarian  control.  To the  contrary,  "aware 
ness of our own needs and attitudes is  our most effective  instru-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comNATURAL  CAUSALITY  AND  INTELLIGENT  PLANNING  255 

ment  for  maintaining  our  own  integrity  and  control  over  our 
own reactions"  (187) .  Awareness  is  a  major element  in defense 
against  external  manipulation.  "Throughout the  course  of  his 
life .. . an individual  is an active participant in the creation of 
his  own  mind,  the  development  of  his  own  self,  and  more 
generally speaking,  his own reality world"  (28). 

How much reason we use  to influence our personal fate  is  up 
to us. Even the most deterministic doctrine must accept the role 
of individual intelligence  as  a  feedback  in the  constellation  of 
behavioral  determinants.  Planning  the  organization  of  mental 
functions  in children-and in adults-may be  oriented  toward 
an increase in the awareness of the cultural elements and neuro 
logical  mechanisms involved in decision-making.  Increasing the 
participation of conscious evaluation diminishes the automatism 
of  responses,  increases  responsibility,  augments  individual  dif 
ferentiation  of  reactivity,  and  permits  enjoyment  of  a  greater 
degree of freedom  because the choices are more  thoughtful and 
in accord with personal evaluation of the circumstances.  One of 
the aims  of  the  planners of  psychocivilization  should be  to  ex 
pose  and  avoid  the  psychological  traps  being  built  into  our 
increasingly  organized  societies.  We  should  try  to  avoid  the 
present trend to dehumanize our behavior, in which social rela 
tions are effective but ·not affective. Services in hospitals, schools, 
and shops are  progressively automatized and depersonalized,  so 
that  now  merchandise,  information, words,  and money  may  be 
exchanged  between  people without  personal  contact. 

These  problems  must  be identified  and  understood  at  their 
many sociological,  psychological,  and  neurophysiological  levels 
in order to make decisions about how to face  them. The psycho 
civilized trend should avoid  the inculcation of rigid patterns of 
response  while  favoring  the  power  of  reason  through  better 
knowledge  of  the  intervening  factors,  including  intracerebral 
functioning.  To pontificate about moral codes or to  impose re 
strictive  measures  may  be  less  desirable-and  less  effective 
than to clarify the reasons  for  individual choice.  A  very  impor 
tant  decision  to  make  is  whether  we  are  going  to  accept  the 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL ·CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

prevailing  orient;ation  of  human  life  toward  construction  of 
more automobiles and designing of orbital  bombs,  or whether 
we would prefer to-dedicate greater social effort to investigating 
and directing_ our own minds,  which must create and interpret 
our circumstances. 

The fundamental question of who is going to exert the power 
of be-havioral control is easy to answer:  everybody who is aware 
of the elements involved and understands how they act upon us 
will  have  that  power.  It is  therefore  essential  that  relevant  in 
formation  not  be  restricted  to  a  small  elite  but  be  shared  by 
all. In this way, solutions will be the product of collective think 
ing, and more importantly, the individual will be provided with 
a  critical  sense  which  will  diminish  his  dependence  on  group 
decisions  and allow  the  search -f-or  new  personal  solutions  and 
therefore greater ind-ividual freedom. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comA Tentative  Plan 

A  new  technology  has  been  developed  for  the  exploration  of 
cerebral  mechanisms  in  .behaving  s1;1bj.ects,  and . it  has  already 
provided  data  about · the  intracerebral  correlates  of  learning, 
memory, drives,  performance; and other as'f>C?cts .of mental func 
tions. This methodology has proved that-movements, sensations, 
emotions, desires,  ideas,  and a variety of psychological  phenom 
ena maybe induced, inhibited, or modified byelectrical stimula 
tion of specific areas of the brain. These · facts  have changed the 
classical  philosophical  concept  that the  mind  was  beyond  ex 
perimental  reach. 

To study psychic mechanisms it is  convenienl to identify and 
to  investigate  the  elements  responsib)e . for  ,the  initiation  of 
mental  activity  at  birth and · for  its  continpation  throughout 
life. The newborn baby lacksdetectablemental <J.Ctivity,  and the 
reception of sensory information from  the enVironm.ent is  abso 
lutely necessary  for  the development of psychic  manifestations. 
The adult is also dependent on a continuous reception of sensory 
inputs for  the  preservation of mental nonnality. 

Understanding  and  study  of  the  ess.ential  and  continuous 
dependence of the mind on sensory  rec_eption  will  favor  man's 
social integration because it shows that we cannot live alone and 
that we need constant inputs of information and sensations from 
the  environment . for  our mental  sqrvival.  At  the  same  time, 
understanding  and  experimental  investigation  of  the  genetic, 
environmental,  and  intracerebral  elements  which  determine 
mental  structure  will  favor · the  intelligent  selection  of  these 

257 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  TliE  MIND 

elements,  and  thus  increase  the  basis  for  individual  differ 
entiation and personal freedom. 

Many scientists have already been attracted by the potential of 
the neurobehavioral sciences.  Brain research  institutes  flourish, 
publications  are  increasing  in  number,  and  the  International 
Brain  Research  Organization  (IBRO)  was  recently  founded  to 
promote study of the central  nervous  system  and to  encourage 
international  collaboration  in  this  field.  The  social  sciences, 
which have a  behavioral rather than a  physiological orientation, 
are  also  in  rapid  development,  partly  because  of  increasing 
public awareness of ghettos, juvenile violence, educational prob 
lems, and general social unrest. Social scientists investigate inter 
personal  and  intergroup  relations,  considering  factors  like  the 
emotions,  economy,  culture,  and  working  conditions,  all  of 
which are involved in man's adaptation to his ever more complex 
surroundings.  The source  of  behavioral  interactions,  however, 
and  the  mechanisms  underlying  anxiety,  violence,  drives,  and 
motivations depend on mental  activities,  which  are  usually  ex 
cluded from  these studies. Both the neurobehavioral and the so 
cial  sciences  are  very  active  fields,  but  their  present  rate  of 
growth  is  too  slow  and  their  objectives  too  limited  to  give 
adequate  support  to  the  ambitious  project  of  improving  the 
present imbalance of civilization. 

I  am  well  aware  that  although  learning  has  detectable  elec 
trical  correlates  in  the  brain  and  emotional  behavior  may  be 
controlled  by  cerebral  radio  stimulation  in  monkey  colonies, 
these  and  similar  facts  are  rather  distant  from  the  problems 
created  and  the solutions  required  by  juvenile delinquency  or 
by  international  tensions.  We  must  realize,  however,  that  the 
potential of new fields  must be evaluated by  the  importance of 
the newly discovered  principles and  their possible  future appli 
cations. 

When Papin saw the lid of a pot being raised by boiling water 
and expressed this phenomenon as  a  physical law,  it would have 
been  difficult  to  foresee  electricity  being  produced  by  steam 
driven turbines or ocean liners crossing the seas. The experimen 
tal reality was a  daily household occurrence;  understanding the 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comA  TENTATIVE  PLAN 

259 
potential  applications  of  the  principle  was  transcendental.  If 
we  could  modify  mental  mechanisms  intelligen_tly,  the  conse 
quences would be far more importannhan the consequences of 
extending man's life span or limiting his birth rate, because  to 
influence  mental  processes  is  to  influence  the ·• source  of  all 
human activities. 

To increase significantly the manpower ~nd resources devoted 
to neurobehavioral sciences it will be necessary first to make the 
public  as  well as  the  scientific  and  politicalauthorities  aware 
that an effort of unusual proportions is essential; explaining the 
reasons  for this effort along with the consequences and possible 
individual  and social  gains.  Second,  it should be. made  known 
that  the  necessary  technology is already  avai!able  and  that sig 
nificant  results  have  already  been  obtained. Third, a  strategy 
should be developed to mobilize public opinion,  talent,  and re 
sources.  This  strategy  requires  interdisciplinary  collaboration 
in order  to organize a  general  plan of action which  should  in 
clude the following aspects. 

Scientific Investigation 

Acquisition of new knowledge  is the cornerstone of scientific 
advance,  and  a  massive  increase  in  research  into  the  cerebral 
mechanisms  of  mental  activity  could  be  initiated  simply  by 
applying the available techno!ogy  on a  larger scale.  This effort, 
however,  cannot  be generated  by  the  scientists  themselves  but 
must  be  promoted  and  organized  by  governmental action  de 
claring  ''conquering  of  the  human mind"  a  national  goal  at 
parity  with  conquering  of  poverty  or  landing  a  man  on  the 
moon.  National  agencies  should  be  created  in order  to  coor 
dinate plans,  budgets,  and actions  just as  NASA  in  the United 
States  has  directed  public  interest  and  technology,  launching 
the country  into the adventures and accomplishments  of  outer 
space.  Fortunately  brain  research  is  much less  expensive,  and 
rather than building up new  industrial empires,  it is · necessary 
to create neurobehavioral institutes with the specific purpose of 
investigating the mechanisms of the behaving brain, while more 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

basic  neurophysiological  research  continues  at  its  normal  rate 
of  growth.  These  institutes  require  interdisciplinary  organiza 
tion  because  their main  purpose  will  be  to  correlate  genetics, 
anatomy,  physiology,  biochemistry,  and  psychopharmacology 
with behavioral, mental, and sociological phenomena. The main 
aim  is  to establish a  scientific  foundation  for  the  creation  of a 
future  psychocivilized  society  based on  a  better understanding 
of mental  activities,  on  the liberation  from  the  domination  of 
irrational mental determinants, on the establishment of personal 
freedom  through intelligent choice,  and on a  balance between 
the material  and  mental  development  of  civilization  with  the 
power  of  reason  directing  the  use  of  increasing  technological 
control  of  our  physical.  environment.  The  research  will  be 
oriented  toward  its  application  to  psychology,  psychiatry,  and 
education without excluding philosophical  implications. 

The project of conquering the human mind could be a central 
theme for international cooperation and understanding because 
its aim is  to know the mechanisms of the brain, which make all 
men behave and misbehave, which give us pleasure and suffering, 
which promote love and hate.  The differences in genetic poten 
tial  among men  are  magnified  grotesquely,  like  shadows  on  a 
wall,  by the educational  environment in which they find  them 
selves.  Even  if  political  ideas,  cultural  values,  and  behavioral 
reactivity  vary,  the  basic  physical,  intellectual,  and  emotional 
needs of man are  the same and must have similar neurophysio 
logical  mechanisms  which  can  be  investigated.  Hate  and  de 
struction are not functional properties of the brain but elements 
introduced through sensory inputs into the neuronal reactivity; 
they originate not within the person, but in the environment. 

Communication 

Interdisciplinary  communication  is  always  important,  but it 
is  even  more  essential  in  the  neurobehavioral  sciences  because 
they are at the crossroads of diverse disciplines.  Cross-communi 
cation should involve investigators not only in related biological 
fields  but also  in areas  which  ordinarily  have  less  contact  with 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comA  TENTATIVE  PLAN 

neural  sciences,  like  sociology,  pedagogy,  and  philosophy.  At 
present there is an important body of knowledge. about cerebral 
physiology and behavioral responses  that has not been absorbed 
into general scientific texts and has not evoked the philosophical 
repercussions  it deserves.  Specialists  usually recognize  the  need 
to  communicate  beyond  their  own  discipline,  but in  practice 
they often neglect  to  do so,  and  this should be one of the  pur 
poses  of  the neurobehavioral institutes. 

Manpower  Shift 

In  free  enterprise systems,  a  shift  in manpower requires  the 
attraction and training of the corresponding personnel,  and this 
is  usually accomplished  by offering intellectual,  economic,  and 
social  incentives.  With  this  procedure.  talented  workers  have 
been  attracted  to  newly  developing  fields ' such  as  electronics 
;md  outer  space  technology,  and -it will  be  necessary  in  the 
neurobehavioral  field  as  well.  In this  case;  however,  something 
else is -needed because a  plan designed to modify the orientation 
of civilization and  to  improve  the balance  between  mechaniza 
tion and mentalization must be based on suitable education  of 
youth,  beginning  with  elementary  schO()b  and  continuing 
through the highest levels. 

Education of Youth 

Educators and psychologists -have recognized -_ that the intellec 
tual and emotional impact of training received at an early age is 
decisive  for  the rest of one's  life.  Important conceptions  about 
mental  activities  and  the  functioning of the  brain  which  will 
have great influence on the student's future development should 
be  introduced as  early as  possible,just_as  today's  child  is  con 
fronted with information about man's escape from his terrestrial 
environment  via  interplanetary  flights. - These  subjects  should 
continue  with  greater  sophistication  at_ secondary  school  and 
college  levels,  competing  for  te(lching  time .with  all  other sub 
jects. What I  am proposing is a  modification of the curriculum 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comPHYSICAL  CONTROL  OF  THE  MIND 

to introduce the discipline of "psychogenesis." Its purpose would 
be  to  teach  factual  scientific  material  about  cerebral  mecha 
nisms, to increase the student's awareness of his own mental and 
behavioral activity, and to show him how to use his intelligence 
to decide which behavioral determinants to accept and which to 
reject. The present orientation of courses in psychology and soci 
ology should be adapted and expanded  according  to  this  plan. 

Social  Education 

Understanding  of  the  mechanisms  of  individual  and  social 
behavior could be an important feedback factor for the modula 
tion  of  behavioral  responses  because  this  understanding  will 
simultaneously  increase  the  importance  of  individual  intellect 
and decrease the power of irrational automatisms.  Education of 
the general  public  would be  facilitated  by  the natural  interest 
in understanding the activity of our own minds. The mass media 
must be  mobilized for  this  purpose,  and  preparation  of enter 
taining  and  informative  programs  should  be  encouraged  and 
promoted by the neurobehavioral institutes. 

Related Problems 

A  host  of  medical,  ethical,  legal,  and  political  questions  are 
involved  in  the  possibility  of  intelligent  choice  among  behav 
ioral  determinants  and  their  control.  Each  of  these  aspects 
deserves careful study and should form  part of the general  plan 
of action. 

I  want to emphasize  that human happiness  is  a relative value 
and  depends as  much  on  mental  interpretation  as  on  environ 
mental  reality.  A  better  understanding  of  mental  mechanisms 
will favor the pursuit of happiness and diminish the unnecessary 
suffering of human beings.  The direction  of the  colossal  forces 
discovered by man requires the development of mental qualities 
able to apply intelligence not only to the domination of nature 
but also to the civilization of the human psyche. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comBibliography 

1.  AHFELD,  J.  F.  Beitrage  zur  Lehre  voni  Uebergange  der  intra 
uterinen  Athmung zur extrauterinen.  Pp.  1-32  in:  "Beitrage 
zur  Physiologie,  Festschrift  zu  Carl  Ludwig,  zu  seinem  70. 
Geburtstage gewidmet  von  seinen Schiilem."  Leipzig:  Vogel, 
1890. 

2.  ALBERTS,  W. W., E. W. WRIGHT,  JR.,  G. LEviN  and B. FEINSTEIN. 
Types of responses elicited by eleCtrical stimulation of certain 
nuclei of the  thalamus and basal ganglia in the human.  EEG 
din.  Neurophysiol.,  12:546,  1960. 

3·  ALTMAN,  J.  Autoradiographic  and  histological  studies  of  post 
natal  neurogenesis.  II. J.  comp.  Neurol.,  128:431-473,  1967. 
4·  ANDERSoN,  B.,  P.  A. JEWELL  and S.  LARssoN.  An appraisal of the 
effects  of  diencephalic  stimulation  of  conscious  animals  in 
terms of normal behaviour. Pp. 76-89 in:  "Neurological Basis 
of Behaviour," G.  E. W. Wolstenholme and C. M. O'Conner, 
(eds.)  Boston:  Little,  Brown  &  Co.,  400  pp;,  1958. 

5·  ANGULO  Y GoNZALEZ,  A.  W.  Is myelinogeny  an  absolute  index 
of behavioral capability? J. comp. Neurol., 48:459-464,  1929. 
6.  AsHBY,  W. R. "Design for a  Brain."  2nd Ed.  New York:  Wiley, 

286 pp.,  1960. 

7·  Ausrr,  GARCIA  E.,  R. ARANA,  E. MIGLIARO,  M. T. SANDE  and J. 
P.  SEGUNDO.  Changes in  the EEG and in  the tendon  jerks  in 
duced by stimulation of the fornix  in man;  EEG din.  Neuro 
physiol.,  6:653-661,  1954. 

8.  BALDWIN,  M.  Electrical  stimulation  of  the  mesial  temporal 
region.  Pp.  159-176 in:  "Electrical Studies on the  Unanesthe 
tized  Brain,"  E  R.  Ramey  and  D.  S.  O'Doherty,  (eds.)  New 
York:  Paul  B.  Roeber,  423  pp.,  1960. 

9·  BANDURA,  A.  A  social  learning  interpretation  of  psychological 
dysfunctions.  Pp.  293~344  in:  "Foundations  of  Abnormal 

263 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comBIBLIOGRAPHY 

Psychology,"  P.  London  and D.  Rosenhan,  (eds.)  New  York: 
Rinehart and Winston,  644  pp.,  1968. 

10.  BARRErr,  W.  "Irrational  Man.  A  Study  in  Existential  Philos 

ophy."  New York:  Doubleday,  278  pp.,  1958. 

11.  BEACH,  F.  A.  The  perpetuation  and  evolution  of  biological 

science. Amer. Psychologist,  21:943-'949,  1g66. 

12.  BEECHER,  H. K.  Ethics and clinical research.  New Eng. J.  Med., 

274:1354-I36o,  1966. 

13.  BENNETT,  E.  L.,  M.  C.  DIAMOND,  D.  KREcH,  and M.  R.  RosEN 
ZWEIG.  Chemical  and  anatomical  plasticity  of  brain.  Science, 
146:610-6I9,  1g64. 

14.  BERITOFF,  J.  S.  "Neural  Mechanisms  of  Higher  Vertebrate 
Behavior."  Trans.  from  Russian  and  Edited  by  W.  T. 
Liberson.  Boston:  Little  Brown,  384  pp.,  1g65. 

I5·  BERKNER, L. V.  Man versus technology. Population Bull., 22:83-

94,  1966. 

16.  BERLYNE,  D.  E.  "Conflict,  Arousal,  and  Curiosity."  New  York: 

McGraw-Hill,  350  pp.,  1960. 

17.  BERTALANFFY,  L.  voN.  "Robots,  Men  and  Minds."  New  York: 

Braziller,  150  pp.,  I967. 

18~  BEXTON, W. H., W. HERON and T. H. Scorr. Effects of decreased 
variation  in  the  sensory  environment.  Canad.  J.  Psycho!., 
8:7~6, 1954· 

19.  BICKFORD,  R. G.,  M.  C.  PETERSEN,  H. W.  DoDGE,  JR.  and C.  W. 
SEM-JAcoBsEN.  Observations  on  depth  stimulation  of  the 
human  brain  through  implanted  electrographic  leads.  Proc. 
Mayo  Clio.,  28:181-187,  1953. 

20.  BisHOP,  M.  P.,  S.  T.  ELDER  and  R.  G.  HEATH.  Intracranial 

self-stimulation in inan. Science,  140:394-396,  1963. 

21.  BoSMAN,  S.c. w., J. TERBLANCHE,  s. J.  SAUNDERS,  G.  G.  HARRI 
SON,  and C.  N.  BARNARD.  Cross-circulation  between  man  and 
baboon. Lancet, ii:583-585,  1968. 

22.  BRArrcAlu>,  S.-0.  The importance  of adequate  stimulation  for 
the chemical composition of retinal ganglion cells during earl:y 
post-natal development.  Acta  radio.,  Suppl.  96,  So  pp.,  1952. 
23.  BRAZIER,  M.  A.  B.  "A History  of  the  Electrical  Activity  of  the 
Brain, The First Half Century." London:  Pitman med. Publ., 
119  pp.,  1961. 

24.  BRINDLEY,  G.  S.  and W.  S.  LEWIN. The sensations  produced  by 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comBIBLIOGRAPHY 

electrical stimulation of the visual cortex. J. Physiol.,  196:479-
493,  1968. 

25.  CAJAL,  S.  RAMON  Y.  "Histologie · du  Systeme  Nerveux  de 
L'homme et des Vertebres." Vol.  I  8c  II; Paris:  Malorie,  1909-
1911. 

26.  DEL CAMPO,  A. Blind can ''see" the shape of things.  Med. World 

News,  Oct.  7,  142-143,  1g66. 

27.  CANESTRINI,  S.  Uber  das  Sinnesleben  des  Neugeborenen. 
Monogr.  Gesamtgeb.  Nemol.  Psychiat.,  No.  5·  Berlin: 
Springer,  104  pp.,  1913. 

28.  CANTRiL,  H.  Sentio,  ergo  sum:  "motivation"  reconsidered.  J. 

Psychol.,  65:91-107,  1967. 

29.  CANTRIL,  H. and W.  K.  LIVINGSTON.  The concept of transaction 
in psychology and neurology: J. iildiv.  Psycho!.,  19:3.:..16,  1963. 
30.  CARMICHAEL,  L. The onset and early development of behavior. 
Pp. 6o-185 in:  "Manual of Child Psychology,'' L. Carmichael, 
(ed.).  New York:  John Wiley,  2nd Ed.,  1295  pp.,  1960. 
31.  CASPARI, E. Genetic basis of behavior~ Pp. 103:_127 in: "Behavior 
and  Evolution,"  A  Roe  and  G.  G.  Simpson,  (eds.)  New 
Haven:  Yale Univ. Press,  557  pp.,  1958. 

32.  CHASE,  W.  P.  Color vision  in infants. J.  exp.  Psychol.,  20:203-

222,  1937· 

33·  CoBB,  S.  Foreword.  Pp.  vii-viii  in.:  "Electrical  Stimulation  of 
the Brain,"  D.  E.  Sheer,  (ed.)  Austin,  Univ.  Texas Press,  641 
pp.,  1961. 

. 

34·  COGHILL,  G.  E.  VI.  The  mechanism  of  integration  in  Ambly 
stoma punctatum. J.  comp.  Neural., 41:95-152, 1926. 

35·  COGHILL,  G.  E.  Correlated anatomical andp.hysiological studies 
of  the  growth  of  the nervous  system  of Amphibia:  IX.  The 
mechanism  of  association  of  Amblystoma  punctatum.  J. 
comp.  Neural.,  51:3i1-375,  193oa. 

36.  COGHILL,  G.  F.  The  structural· basis · of  the  integration  of  be 

havior.  Proc. nat. Acad. Set,  16:637-643,  193ob. 

37.  COGHILL,  G.  E. X.  Corollaries of the anatomic~ and physiologi 
cal study of Amblystoma hom the age of earliest movement. to 
swimming. J.  conip.  Nemol.,  53:147-168,  1931. 

38.  CoLE,  L.  C.  Can .the  world  be.· saved?  BioScience,  18:67g-684, 

1g68. 

39·  CoMPAYRE, G.  "The Intellectual and Moral Development of the 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comBIBLIOGRAPHY 

Child:  Part I.  (Trans.  by  M.  E.  WILSON).  New  York:  Apple 
ton,  1896. 

40.  CoNDON,  R.  "The  Manchurian  Candidate."  New  York: 

McGraw-Hill,  311  pp.,  1959. 

41.  CoNEL,  J.  L.  "The  Postnatal  Development  of  the  Human 
Cerebral Cortex." Vol.  I,  114 pp. Vol.  II,  136  pp. Vol. III, 158 
pp.  Cambridge,  Harvard  Univ.  Press:  1939,  1941,  1947. 
42.  Cox, V.  C.  and E. S.  VALENSTEIN.  Attenuation of aversive  prop 
erties  of  peripheral  shock  by  hypothalamic  stimulation. 
Science,  149:323-325,  1965. 

43·  CRANBERG, L. Ethical code for scientists? Science, 141:1242, 1963. 
44·  DE  CRINIS,  M.  Die  Entwicklung  der  Grosshimrinde  nach  der 
Geburt in ihren  Beziehungen  zur intellektuellen Ausreifung 
des  Kindes. Wien.  Klin.  Wschr., 45:1161-1165,  1932. 

45·  CRUCHET,  R.  La  mesure  de  !'intelligence  chez  !'enfant  de  la 

naissance.  J.  med.  Bordeaux,  107:951-96o,  1930. 

46.  DECARLO,  C.  R.  Perspectives  on  technology.  Pp.  8-43  in: 
"Technology  and  Social  Change."  E.  Ginzberg,  (ed.)  New 
York:  Columbia Univ. Press,  158  pp.,  1964. 

47·  DELGADO,  J.  M.  R.  Permanent  implantation  of multilead elec 

trodes  in the  brain.  Yale J.  Bioi.  Med.,  24:351-358,  1952a. 

48.  DELGADO,  J.  M.  R.  Hidden  motor  cortex  of  the  cat.  Amer.  J. 

Physiol.,  170:673-681,  1952b. 

49·  DELGADO,  J.  M.  R.  Chronic implantation  of intracerebral  elec 
trodes  in  animals.  Pp.  25-36  in:  "Electrical  Stimulation  of 
the  Brain," D.  E.  Sheer,  ed.),  Austin:  Univ.  Texas  Press,  641 
pp.  1961. 

50.  DELGADO, J.  M.  R. Emotional behavior in animals and humans. 

Psychiat.  Res.  Rep.,  12:25g-271,  1960. 

51.  DELGADO,  J.  M.  R.  Cerebral  heterostimulation  in  a  monkey 

colony.  Science,  141:161-163,  1963. 

52.  DELGADo,  J.  M.  R.  Electrodes  for  extracellular  recording  and 
stimulation.  Pp.  88-143  in:  "Electrophysiological  Methods," 
Vol. V,  Part A:  "Physical Techniques in Biological Research." 
N. L. Nastuk, (ed.), New York:  Academic Press, 460 pp., 1964a. 
53·  DELGADO,  J.  M.  R.  Free  behavior  and  brain  stimulation.  Pp. 
34g-449  in:  "International  Review  of  Neurobiology,"  Vol. 
VI.  C.  C.  Pfeiffer  and J.  R.  Smythies,  (eds.)  New  York:  Aca 
demic  Press,  476  pp.,  1964b. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comBIBLIOGRAPHY 
54·  DELGADO,  J.  M.  R.  Sequential  behaviQr  repeatedly  induced  by 
red  nucleus  stimulation  in  free  monkeys.  Science,  148:1361-
1363,  1965. 

55·  DELGADO,  J.  M.  R.  Brain  technology  and  psychocivilization. 
Pp. 68-g2 in:  "Human Values an(! Advancing Technology.  A 
New  Agenda  for  the. Church  in  Mission."  C.  P.  Hall  (ed.), 
New York:  Friendship Press,  175  pp., 1g67. 

56.  DELGADo, J.  M.  R. Aggression and defense under cerebral radio 
control.  J>p.  171-193  in:  "Aggression  and  Defense.  Neural 
Mechanisms  and Social  Patterns."  UCLA  Forum  in  Medical 
Sciences,  No.  7,  Vol.  V,  C.  D.  Clemente  and  D.  B.  Lindsley, 
(eds.),  Berkeley:  Univ.  Cal.  Press,  361  pp.,  1967. 

57·  DELGADO,  J.  M.  R.  and H. HAMuN.  Surface  and depth electro 
graphy  of  the  frontal  lobes  in conscious  patients.  EEG  din. 
Neurophysiol.,  8:371-384,  1956. 

58.  DELGADO,  J.  M.  R.  and  H.  HAMLiN•  Spon~aneous and  evoked 
electrical  seizures  in  animals  and in humans.  Pp.  133-158  in 
"Electrical  Studies  on  the  Unanesi:he.tized  Brain."  Estelle  R. 
Ramey  and  Desmond  S.  O'Doh,erty,  (eds.)  New  York:  Paul 
B.  Roeber 432  pp.,  1g6o. 

59·  DELGADO, J. M. R., H. HAMLIN and W. P.  CHAPMAN.  Technique 
of  intracranial  electrode  implacement  for  recording  and 
stimulation  and  its  possible  therapeutic  value  in  psychotic 
patients.  Con£.  neurot,  12:315-,319,  1952. 

6o.  DELGADO, J.  M.  R., V.  MARK,  W. SwEET,  F.  ERVIN,  G.  WEISS,  G. 
BAcH-Y-RITA,  and R.  HAGIWARA.  Intracerebral radio stimula 
tion and recording in completely free  patients. J.  nerv.  ment. 
Dis.,  147:329-340,  1968. 

61.  DELGADO,  J.  M.  R.  and  D.  MIR.  Infatigability  of  pupillary 
constriction  evoked  by  stimulation  in  monkeys.  Neurology, 
16:939-950,  1966. 

62.  DELGADO, J.  M. R., W. W. RoBERTS,  and N. E.  MILLER.  Learning 
motivated  by  electrical  stimulation  of  the  brain.  Amer.  J. 
. 
Physiol.,  179:587-593,  •954· 

63.  DIAMOND,  S.,  R. S.  BALVIN,  and F. R. DIAMONP.  "Inhibition and 
Choice.  A  Neurobehavioral Approach  to  Problems  of  Plas 
ticity  in Behavior." New York:  Harper& Row,  456  pp.,  1963. 
64.  DoBZHANSKY,  TH.  Genetics,  society  and  evolution.  Bull.  N.Y. 

Acad.  Med.,  38:451-459, .1g62. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comBIBLIOGRAPHY 

65.  DoBZHANSKY,  TH.  "Mankind Evolving.  The  Evolution  of  the 
Human Species." New Haven: Yale Univ. Press, 381  pp.,  1962. 
66.  DoBZHANSKY,  Tu.  Changing man.  Science,  155:409-415.  1967. 
67.  DREVER,  J.  "A  Dictionary  of  Psychology."  Baltimore,  Md.: 

Penguin  Books,  Inc.,  316  pp.,  1952. 

68.  DuBors-REYMOND,  E.  Untersuchungen  iiber  thierische  Elek 

tricitat. Vol.  I.  Berlin:  Reimer,  1848.  Vol.  II,  1849. 

69.  DuBos,  R.  "The  Torch  of  Life."  New  York:  Trident  Press, 

Simon & Schuster,  140  pp.,  1g62. 

70.  DuNBAR,  F. "Emotions and Bodily Changes. A Survey of Litera 
ture  on  Psychosomatic  Interrelationships  1910-1953·"  New 
York:  Columbia Univ.  Press,  1192  pp.,  4th Ed.,  1954. 
71.  EccLEs~ J.  C.  "The  Neurophysiological  Basis  of  Mind."  Ox 

ford:  Clarendon  Press,  314  pp.,  1953· 

72.  ERLANGER, J.  E.  and H. S.  GASSER.  "Electrical signs of Nervous 
Activity."  Philadelphia:  Univ.  Penn.  Press,  221  pp.,  1937. 

73·  ERVIN,  F.  Participant  in  "Brain  Stimulation  in  Behaving  Sub 
jects."  Neurosciences Research Program Workshop, Dec.,  1966. 
74·  FEINDEL,  W.,  W.  PENFIELD  and H. JASPER.  Localization  of epi 
leptic discharge  in temporal  lobe  automatism.  Trans.  Amer. 
Neurol.  Assoc.,  14-17,  1952. 

75·  FIELD, J., H. W. MAGOUN,  and W. E. HALL (eds.).  "Handbook of 
Physiology.  Section  1:  Neurophysiology."  Washington,  D.C.:  . 
Amer.  Physiol.  Soc.,  Vol.  I,  1959,  Vols.  II &  III,  1960. 
76.  FLECHSIG,  P.  E.  "Gehirn  und  seele."  Leipzig:  Veit  &  Co.,  112 

pp.,  18g6. 

77·  FLOREY,  E.  (ed.).  "Nervous  Inhibition."  Proc.  Second  Friday 

Harbour Symp.  New York:  Pergamon Press,  475  pp.,  1961. 

78.  FoRBES,  A.  The  interpretation  of  spinal  reflexes  in  terms  of 
present knowledge of nerve conduction. Physiol.  Rev.,  2:361-
414,  1922. 

79·  FoRBES,  H. S.  and H.  B.  FoRBES.  Fetal  sense  reaction:  hearing. 

J. comp.  Psychol., 7:353-355,  1927. 

8o.  FREuD,  S.  (1856-1939) "The Basic Writings of Sigmund Freud." 
Trans. and edited by A.  A.  Bull.  New York:  Modern Library, 
1001  pp.,  1938. 

St.  FULTON, J.  F. and C.  F.  JACOBSEN.  The functions of the frontal 
lobes,  a  comparative  study  in  monkeys,  chimpanzees  and 
man.  Advances  in mod.  Bioi.  (Moscow),  4:113-123,  1935. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comBI~I,.IOGRAPIIY 

269 
82.  FUR.FEY,  P.H.,M.A. BONHJ\M,  ap<J..M.J<:. SAAGENT.  The mental 
organization of ~e newborn.  Chil!i  J:)evelp{\l.,  1: 4~51, 1930. 
83.  GALVANI,  L.  De viribus _electricitatis in Illotu  Illusculari.  Com 

men~rius. Proc. Acaq,  Bologna,  7:36-3-418,  1791. 

84.  G~ER, E.  Bau  und  Leistungey~ ei:t1,es  iJlenschlichert Mittel 
hirnwesens · (Arhillencephalie  mit  Encepb,alQCde).  Z,  ges. 
Neurol. Psychiat.,  102: 154-:-235, .192.6~  · --~ 

85.  GEERTZ,  C.  The impact  of the  concept of culture  on  the  con 

cept of man. Bull. atom.  Sci~, .22:2-8,  19(}6. 

86.  GENZl\iER,  A.  l]tersuchungen  ii~er die -Sin.ne$wahm.ehnmngen 
des  neugeborenen  Menscllen.  (l)~ertation,  1873)•  Halle: 
Niemeyer,  1882. 

·-
87.  GERARD,  M. W. Afferent impulses of the trigemip.alnerve. The 
intramedullary course of the paillful, _ thelntal and tactile  im 
pulses.  Arch.  Neurol.  Psychiat.  (Chicago~.  9:306-338, · 1923. 
88.  GESELL,  A. L. "Infancy and Human Growth.".New Yo.rk:  Mac-

· 

-

millan. 418 pp .•  1928, 

·. 

. 

.. 

- -_-._-_. __ ...• 

89.  GRASTY AN,  E.,  K.  Ltss.AK and F. K:fKES1: Facllitation and-inhibi 
tion  of  conditioned  alimentary  .;md:  defe,nsi:ve_ r~flexes  by 
stimulation  of  the  hypothalamus  anq -reticular  formation . 
. Acta  physiol.  Acad. Sci.  !lung.,  9: 1·33~151!  •956. 

go.  Gau~AUI~.J, A.  Causality  and --_ ijle  ~n~ . of . hull).~ behavior. 

Amer,  Sci.,  40:665-676,  1952; 

91.  HAMBERGER,  C. A. and H. HYDEN.  P~;oduction ()f nucleoproteins 
in the vestib_ular ganglion. Acta oto-laryng.,  Suppt 75:53-81, 
1949· 

92.  HARLOw,  H.  F. Love in infant mo~eys.  Sci. Amer.,  2oo:68-74, 

1959· 

93·  HARLOW,  H.  F.,  and  M.  K.  HARL.OW.  Learning  to  think.  Sci. 

Amer.,  181 :3&-::39, 1949. 

94·  HARLOW,  H. F. and M. K. HARLow.· So<iial'deprivation in mon 

keys. Sci. Amer.,  207 : 13.~146, 1g62. 

95·  HARLOw,  H.  F.,  M.  K.  ~AilLoW, and D.  R .. MEYER .. Learning 
motivated by a  manipJJ-lation .drive .. J.  ex;p.  Psycho}.,  40:228-: 
234·  1950. 

.  .  . 

. 

. 

-

g6.  HAssLER,  R. -Ueber  die  lledet.Jtung  des  pallidaren  Systems  fur 
Parkinsonsyndrofil und }tsychomotorik-qf!ch Erfahrungen  bei 
gezielten  Hirnoperationen.  Brussels:  1st int.  Congr.  Neuro 
surg.,  1:171-:178,  1957. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com270 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

97·  HASSLER,  R .  and  T.  REICHERT.  Clinical  effects  produced  by 
stimulations  of  different  thalamic  nuclei  in  humans.  EEG 
din.  Neurophysiol.,  6:518,  1954. 

g8.  HEATH,  R.  G.,  "Studies  in  Scliizophrenia.  A  multidisciplinary 
Approach  to  Mind-Brain  Relationships."  Cambridge:  Har 
vard Univ. Press, 619  pp.,  1954. 

99·  HEATH,  R.  G.  Electrical  self-stimulation  of  the  brain  in man. 

Amer.  J.  Psychiat.,  120:571-577•  1963. 

100.  HEATH,  R.  G.,  R.  R.  MoNROE  and W.  MICKLE.  Stimulation of 
the amygdaloid nucleus  in a  schizophrenic  patient.  Amer.  J. 
Psychiat.,  Ill :862-863,  1955· 

101.  HEBB,  D.  0.  The  innate  organization  of  visual  activity:  I. 
Perception of figures by rats reared in total darkness. J. genet. 
Psychol.,  51:10I-126,  1937. 

102.  HEBB,  D. 0. "A Textbook of Psychology."  Philadelphia:  Saun 

ders,  276  pp.,  1958-

103.  HERON,  W.  The pathology of boredom.  Sci.  Amer.,  196:52-56, 

1957· 

104.  HERRICK,  C; J. "Neurological Foundations of Animal Behavior." 

New York:  Hafner, 334  pp.,  1g62. 

105.  HESS, W. R. Stammganglien-Reizversuche. (Verb. Dtsch. physiol. 
Ges.,  Sept.,  1927).  Ber.  ges.  Physiol.,  42:554-555,  1928. 
106.  HEss,  W.  R .  "Beitrage  zur  Physiologie  d.  Hirnstammes  I.  Die 
Methodik  der  lokalisierten  Reizung.  und  Ausschaltung  sub 
kortikaler Hirnabschrtitte." Leipzig:  Georg Thieme,  122  pp., 
1932· 

107.  HESs,  W.  R.  "The  Functional  Organization  of  the  Dienceph 
alon."  New  York:  Grune &  Stratton,  180  pp.,  1957. 
108.  HESS,  W.  R.  "Hypothalamus  und  Thalamus.  Experimental 

Dokumente." Stuttgart:  Georg Thieme Verag,  77  pp.  1968. 

109.  HIGGINS, J. W., G. F. MAHL, J.  M. R. DELGADO  and H. HAMLIN. 
Behavioral changes during intracerebral electrical stimulation. 
Arch.  Neurol.  Psychiat.,  (Chicago),  76:399-419,  1956. 
110.  HINSIE,  L.  E.  and  R.  J.  CAMPBELL.  "Psychiatric  Dictionary." 
New York:  Oxford Univ. Press,  3rd Ed.,  788  pp.,  1960. 
111.  HoLST,  E.  VON  and  U.  voN  SAINT  PAUL.  Electrically  controlled 

behavior.  Sci.  Amer.,  2o6:5o-59,  1962. 

112.  HooKER,  D.  Fetal  behavior.  Res.  Publ.  Ass.  nerv.  ment.  Dis., 

19:237-243·  1939· 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comBIBLIOGRAPHY 

113.  HuANG,  S.  Life  in  space  and  humanity  on  the  earth.  Amer. 

Scientist,  53:288-298,  1965. 

114.  HuxLEY,  A. 

''Brave  New  World."  New  York:  Harper  & 

Brothers,  311  pp.,  1932. 

115.  HYDEN,  H.  Satellite  cells  in  the  nervous  system.  Sci.  Amer., 

205:62-70, 1961. 

116.  IRWIN,  0.  C.  Infant  responses  to  vertical  movements.  Child 

Develpm.,  3:167-169,  1932. 

117.  IRWIN,  0.  C.  Can  infants  have  IQ's?  Psycho!.  Rev.,  49:69-79, 

1942. 

118.  JAKOB,  C.  El  lobulo  frontal.  Folia  Neurobiol.  Argentina,  3:1-

141,  1943· 

119.  jAMES,  W. "Principles of Psychology."  New York:  Dover  Publ., 

Vols.  I  &  II,  688  pp.  ea,  1950. 

120.  JASPER,  H.  H.  and T  RASMUSSEN.  Studies  of clinical  and elec 
trical response to deep temporal stimulation in man with some 
considerations  of  functional  anatomy.  Res.  Publ.  Ass.  nerv. 
ment.  Dis.,  36:316-334,  1958. 

121.  JENNINGs,  H. S.  "The Biological Basis of Human Nature." New 

York:  Norton, 384 pp.,  1930. 

122~  JuNG,  R.  Discussant.  P.  198  in:  "Brain  Mechanisms  and  Con 
sciousness."  J.  F.  Delafresnaye,  (ed.).  Springfield,  Ill.:  C.  C. 
Thomas,  1954. 

123.  JuNG,  R.  and  R.  HASsLER.  The extrapyramidal  motor  system. 
Pp.  863--927 
in:  "Handbook  of  Physiology,"  Section  1: 
Neurophysiology VoL II, J. Field,  H.  W.  Magoun  and V.  E. 
Hall,  (eds.)  Baltimore,  Md.:  Williams  & Wilkins,  pp.  781-
1439,  1960. 

124.  JuNG,  R.,  T.  REICHERT  u.  R.  W.  MEYER-MICKELEIT.  Ueber  in 
tracerebrale  Himpotentialableitungen  bet  himchirurgischen 
Eingriffen.  Dtsch.  Z.  Nervenheilk.,  162:52-60,  1950. 

125.  KASATKIN,  N.  I.,  and A.  M.  LEVIKOVA.  On the development  of 
early  conditioned  reflexes  and  differentiations  of  auditory 
stimuli in infants. J.  exp.  Psycho!.,  18:1-19,  1935. 

126.  KETCHEL,  M.  M.  Should  birth  control  be  mandatory?  Med. 

World News,  Oct.  18:66-71,  1968. 

127.  KETY,  S.  A  biologist  examines  the  mind  and  behavior. 

Science,  132: t86I-187o, 1g6o. 

128.  KING,  H.  E.  Psychological  effects  of  excitation  in  the  limbic 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comBIBLIOGRAPHY 

system. Pp. 477-486 in:  "Electrical Stimulation of the Brain," 
D. E. Sheer (ed.) Austin:  Univ. Texas Press, 641  pp.,  1961. 

129.  KoESTLER,  A.  ''The  Ghost  in  the  Machine."  New  York:  Mac 

millan,  384  pp.,  1968. 

130.  KosKOFF,  Y.  D.  Personal Communication. 
131.  KRAsNER,  L. Behavioral control and social responsibility. Amer. 

Psychologist,  17:199-'-204,  1964. 

132.  KREca,  D.,  M.  R.  RosENZWEIG  and  E.  L.  BENNETT.  Environ 
mental  impoverishment,  social  isolation  and  changes  in 
brain chemistry and anatomy. Physiology and Behavior,  I:9g-
104,  1966. 

133.  KuBI'E,  L. Some implications for psychoanalysis of modem con 
cepts  of the organization  of  the  brain.  Psychoanalyt.  Quart., 
22:21-68,  1953· 

134.  KuHLENBECK,  H.  "Mind  and  Matter.  An  Appraisal  of  Their 
Significance  for  Neurologic  Theory."  Basel:  S.  Karger,  548 
pp.,  1961. 

135.  KussMAUL,  A.  "Utersuchungen tiber das Seelenleben des neuge 

borenen  Menschen."  Leipzig:  Winter,  1859. 

136.  LANE,  H. H . The correlation between structure and function in 
the development of the special senses  of the  white  rat.  Univ. 
Okla. Bull (N. S.  no.  140), pp.  1-88,  1917. 

137.  LANGE,  F.  A.  "History  of  Materialism."  1873  (Trans.  by  E.  C. 

Thomas).  New  York:  Harcourt  Brace,  1925. 

138.  Langworthy,  0.  R.  A  correlated  study  of  the  development  of 
reflex activity in fetal and young kittens and the myelinization 
of  uacts  in  the  nervous  system.  Contr.  Embryol.,  Carnegie 
Inst.  Wash.,  20,  No.  u4,  127-171,  1929. 

139.  LANGWORTHY,  0.  R.  Development  of  behavior  patterns  and 
myelinization of the  nervous  system  in  the  human  fetus  and 
infant. Contr. Embryo!. Carneg. Inst.,  24:  No.  139,  1933. 
qo.  Lashley, K.  S.  Studies of cerebral function in learning:  VI. The 
theory  that  synaptic . resistance  is  reduced  by  the  passage  of 
the nerve  impulse.  Psycho!.  Rev.,  31:369--375,  1924. 
141.  LEIDERMAN,  P.  H., J.  H.  MENDELSON,  D.  WEXLER  and P.  SoLo 
MON.  Sensory  deprivation:  clinical  aspects.  Arch.  int.  Med., 
1-Dl: 389--396,  1958. 

142.  LEVI-STRAuss,  C.  "A  World  on  the  Wane."  Trans.  by  J.  Rus 

sell.  London:  Hutchinson &  Co.,  404  pp.,  1961. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comIUBLIOGRAPH;Y 
143.  LIFTO!'I,  R. J. "Thought Refonn and~hePsychology of Totalism: 
A  Study  of  "~raillwashing''  in  China.':'. ~ew .  York:  W.  W. 
Norton, 510  pp., .1961. 

· 
144.  LILUE,  R.  S.  "Protoplasmk  Action  and  Nervous  System." 

· · 

Chicago, III.: Univ.  Chicag~ Press,  2nd Ed,. 417  pp.,  1932. 

145.  LILLY,  J.  C.  Discussion of "Studies in _Schizophrenia.';  Pp.  528-
5311, in "Studies in Schizophrenia," Ca~bri<l~: Harvard Univ. 
. . 
Press,  619  pp., 1954. 

. 

. 

. 

146.  LILLY,  ].  C.  Learning m:otiv~ted by subcorticahtimulatioa:  the 
start and stop patterns of behavior.  Pp.  705-'7~n, in:  '':Retic 
ular Formation of the Brain,'' Helll"f  Ford fl:osp.  int.  Symp., 
H .  H.  Jasper,  et  al.  (eds.),  Bos~(}n :
. 1Jtde .  Brown,  ']66  pp:, 
1958. 

147.  LocKE,  J.  "Essay  Concerning  Human  l,Jiiderstand.ing."  (16go). 

Cambridge:  Harvard Univ. Pre$~, 3® pp., .1931. 

. . 

148.  LoRENZ,  K.  Ritualized  fighting.  Pp. · 39"-5o.iri:  "The  Natural 
History  of Aggression. ~·  J.  D ~,  Carthy ~d F. J·  Ebling,  (eds.) 
New York:  Academic Press,  159  pp.,  •964-

149·  LoRENZ,  K.  "On  Aggression~" ·  New  Yor}t,:  Harcourt,  Brace  & 

World, 306  pp.,  1966. 

· 

· 

, .. .. 

150.  MAHL,  G.  F.,  A  RoTHENBERG,  J. 1\f. R._.  1l~~Ail0 and H. HAM 
LIN.  Psychological  responses in ,tb,e  . hum~n .t<>. intracerebral 
electric  stimulation.  Psychosom.  Med~;  26j37-368,  1g64. 

151.  MARcusE,  H.  One  Ditnellsional  Man,  B<>s~oll:  Beacon  Press, 

1g64. 

. 

·. 

152.  MARMOR,  J.  Psychoanalytic-therapy a.s an edu~iti:ional pr()cess: 
Common denomii1ators in the. tl1erapeu.tic approaches  of dif 
ferent  psychoanalytic ''schools." Paper presented to the Acad. 
Psychoanal.,  Chicago, May,  1961. 

. 

·· 

·. 

153.  MEDICAL  RESEARCH  CQu~ciL.  Responsil{!lity  in  investigations 

on human subjects. Brit med.J~;  2:17~.179~ ' •964-

154- MILLER,  N.  E.  Learnable drives  andJ::ewards.  Pp.  435-472  in: 
"Handbook of Experimet;t,tal  Psycholpgy,·~ S.  S.  Stevens,  (ed.) 
New  York:  John Wiley,1436pp., .195i. ' 

155·  MINKOWSKI, M . Surles mouveme~ts, . les reflexes, et les reactions 
musculaires du fOetUs  humain <ie, 2. a 5 m()iS  et leur relations 
avec  le  systeme  nerv~l)x  f<>etal,  ~ev.,  pe.urol.,  37:1105-1118, 
1235-U50,  1921. 

. 

156.  MriTELMANN,  B. Motility in infants, children, and adults:  pat-

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com274 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

teming and psychodynamics.  Psychoanal. Study of the Child, 
g: 14.2-177·  1954· 

157.  MoNTAGU,  A.  "On  Being  Human."  New  York:  Hawthorne 

Books,  Inc.,  1.28  pp.,  .2nd  Ed.,  1966. 

158.  MoRGAN,  C.  "Animal  Life and Intelligence."  London:  Arnold, 

512 pp.,  I8g<>-gi. 

159·  NASHOLD,  B.  S.  and W. V.  HuBER  (eds.).  Second Symposium on 
Parkinson's Disease. J.  Neurosurg.,  24:117-481,  1966. 

160.  NASHOLD,  B.  S.  Personal  communication. 
161.  New  England J.  Med.  Editorial:  New  Eng.  J.  Med.,  275:785-

786,  1966. 

16.2.  NissEN,  H.  W.,  S.  MACHOVER,  and  E.  F.  KINDER.  A  study  of 
performance  tests  given  to  a  group of  native  African  Negro 
Children. Brit. J.  Psychol., .25:308-355,  1935. 

163.  OKUMA,  T.,  Y.  SHIMAZoNo,  T.  FUKUDA  and  H.  NARABAYASHI. 
Cortical  and  subcortical  recordings  in  non-anesthetized  and 
anesthetized periods in man.  EEG din.  Neurophysiol.  6:26g-
286,  1954· 

164.  Orns,  J.  Hypothalamic  substrates  of  reward.  Physiol.  Rev., 

42=554-604,  1962. 

165.  Orns,  J.  and  P.  MILNER.  Positive  reinforcement  produced  by 
electrical  stimulation  of  the septal  area  and other regions  of 
the rat brain. J.  comp.  physiol.  Psychol.,  47:419-428,  1954. 

166.  ORTEGA  Y GASsET,  J.  "Meditations on  Quixote."  Trans.  by  E. 
Rugg  and  D.  Marin,  with  notes  and  introduction  by  J. 
Marias. New York:  W. W.  Norton,  1961. 

167.  ORTEGA  Y GASSET,  J.  "History as  a  System."  New  York:  W.  W. 

Norton,  1961. 

168.  ORWELL,  G.  "1984."  New York:  Harcourt, Brace,  314 pp.,  1949. 
169.  Oxford  Universal  Dictionary.  London:  Oxford  Univ.  Press, 

2515  pp.,  1955· 

170. · P ASAMANICK,  B.  Research  on  the  influence  of  sociocultural 
variables upon organic factors in mental retardation. Amer. J. 
ment.  Defic.,  64:316-320,  1959. 

171.  PAVLOV,  I.  P.  "Experimental  Psychology."  New  York:  Philo 

sophical Library, 653  pp.,  1957. 

172.  PEIPER,  A.  Der Saugvorgang.  Ergebn.  inn.  Med.  Kinderheilk., 

50:527-567,  1936. 

173.  PEIPER,  A.  Die  neurologischen  Grundlagen  der  psychischen 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comBIBLIOGRAPHY 

275 

Entwicklung.  Mschr.  Kinderheilk.,  87:179-203, ·1941. 
174.  PENFIELD,  W.  and  H.  JASPER.  "Epilepsy  and  the  Functional 
Anatomy  of  the Human  Brain."  Boston:  Little,  Brown,  8g6 
pp.,  1954· 

175.  PETERSON,  F.  and L.  H. RAINEY.  The beginningsof mind in the 
newborn.  BulL  Lyring-in  Hosp.,  N.Y.,  7:99-122,  i910. 
176.  PFLUGER,  E.  Die  LebensHi.higkeit  des  menschJichen  Foetus. 

Pfiiig.  Arch.  ges.  Physiol.,  14:628-,629,  1877· 

177.  PIAGET,  J.  "Th.e  Origins  of Intelligence  in  Children,"  Trans. 
by Margaret Cook. New York:  Int. Universities Press,  419 pp., 
1952. 

178.  PIAGET,  J.  Psychology,  interdisciplinary  relations  and  the  sys 
tem  of sciences.  Moscow:  XVIII  Int.  Congr.  Psycho!.,  47  pp., 
1966. 

179.  PLATT,  J.  R.  "The Step  to  Man,"  New  York:  Wiley,  224  pp., 

1966. 

180.  PRATT,  K.  C., A.  K.NELSON,and K.H .. SuN. The behavior of the 
newborn infant.  Ohio State Univ. Stud.,  Contr. Psycho!.,  No. 
10,  1930. 

181.  RAINER,  J.  D.  The  concept  of  mind  in  the  framework  of 
genetics.  Pp.  65-79  in:  "Theories of the  Mind," J.  M.  Scher, 
(ed.)  New York:  The Free Press of Glencoe, 748  pp., 1962. 

182.  RAMEY,  E.  R.  and D.  S.  O'DoHERTY  (eds.).  "Elect:Iical  Studies 
on  the  Unanesthetized  Brain."  New  York:  Paul  B.  Roeber, 
Inc., 423  pp.,  1960. 

183.  RANK,  0. "The Trauma of Birth:' New York:  Harcourt Brace, 

224  pp.,  1929· 

184.  RIESJ::N,  A.  H.,  K.  L.  Caow,  J.  SEMMES,  and  H.  W.  NrsSEN. 
Chimpanzee vision after four conditions of light deprivation. 
Amer.  Psychologist,  6:28.2  (Abstract)  195.1. 

185.  RrocH, D. McK. Concluding remarks. Pp. 402-412  in:  "Electri 
cal Studies on the  l.Jnanesthetized  Brain,"  E.  R.  Ramey  and 
D.  S.  O'Doherty,  (eds~)·  New York:  Paul  B.  Roeber,  423  pp., 
1960. 

186.  RoBERTS,  L.  Activation  and  interference  of  corticalfunctions. 
Pp.  533-553 in:  "Electrical Stimulation of the  Brain,"  D.  E. 
Sheer (ed.)  Austin:  Univ. Texas Press,  641  pp.,  1961. 
187.  RoE,  A.  Man's  forgotten  weapon.  Amer.  Psychologist,  14:261-

266,  1959· 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comBIBLIOGRAPHY 

188.  RoGERS,  C.  R.  and  B.  F.  SKINNER.  Some  issues  concerning  the 
control of human behavior:  A symposium.  Science,  124:1057-
1066,  1956.  -

189.  RosENTHAL,  D.  Changes in moral values  following  psychother 

apy.  J. consult.  Psycho!.,  19:431-436,  1955. 

190.  RosENZWEIG,  M.  R.,  D .  .KRECH,  E.  L.  BENNET,  and  M.  C. 
DIAMOND.  Modifying  brain -chemistry  and  anatomy  by  en 
richment or impoverishment  of  experience.  Pp.  258-297  in: 
"Early Experience and Behavior,"  G.  Newton and S.  Levine, 
(eds.) Springfield,  Ill.:  C.  C. Thomas, 785  pp.,  1968. 

191.  RosvoLD,  H, E.  and J.  M.  R.  DELGADO.  The effect  on delayed 
alternation  test  performance  of  stimulating  or  destroying 
electrically structures within the frontal lobes of the monkey's 
brain. J. comp.  physiol. Psycho!., 49:365-372,  1956. 

192.  RussELL,  B.  "A History of Western Philosophy, and its Connec 
tion with Political and Social Circumstances from  the Earliest 
Times to the  Present Day."  New York:  Simon  and Schuster, 
895  pp.,  1945. 

193·  SADGER,  J. Preliininary study of the psychic life of the fetus  and 
the primary germ.  Psychoanal.  Rev.,  28:327-358,  1941. 
194.  SARTRE,  l  P.  "L'etre  et  le  neant;  essai  d'ontologie  phenom 

enologique."  Paris:  Gallimard, 722  pp.,  1943. 

195.  ScHER, J. M. (ed.). "Theories of the Mind." New York:  The Free 

Press of Glencoe,  748  pp.,  1962. -· 

1g6.  Science Editorial. Privacy and behavioral research.  Preliminary 
summary of the report of the panel on privacy and behavioral 
research. Science,  155:535-538, 1g67. 

197.  ScHUL'IZ,  D.P. "Sensory Restriction, Effects on Behavior."  New 

York:  Academic Press,  216  pp.,  1965. 

198.  SECHENov,  I.  M.  "Elements  of  Thought."  In  Russian  (1878). 

Moscow:  USSR Acad.  Sci.  Press,  1943. 

. 

199.  SEGUNDO,  J.  P.,  E.  GARCIA  Aus  JR.,  R.  ARANA  INIGUEZ  and  E. 
MIGLIARO.  Respiratory, electrocortical and spinal responses  to 
stimulation of fornix in man. EEG din. Neurophysiol., 6:537-
538,  1954· 

200.  SEM-JACOBSEN,  C.  W.  Electrical stimulation-effects on speech  in 
some  areas  around  the  third  ventricle.  EEG  din.  Neuro 
physiol.,  14:953-956,  1962. 

201.  SEM-JACOBSEN,  C.  W.  "Depth-Electrographic Stimulation of the 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comBIBLIOGRAPHY 

277 
Human Brain and Behavior:  From Fourteen Years of Studies 
and Treatment of Parkinson's Disease  and  Mental Disorders 
with Implanted  Electrodes/'  Springfield,  IlL:  C.  C.  Thomas, 
222  pp.,  1968. 

. 

202.  SENDEM:,  M.  voN.  ~Raum · und  Gestaltauffassung  bei  operierten 
Blindgeborenen vor und nach der ()pera.tion. Leipzig:  Barth, 
303  pp.,  1932· 

.. .. 

203.  SHEER,  D.  E.,  (ed.).  "Electrical  Stimulation  of  the  Brain." 

Austin:  Univ. Texas. PreSs,  641  pp.,  196.1. 

204.  SHE&MAN,  M.  The  differentiation  of  emotional  responses  in 
infants:  I.  Judgments  of emotional ,response  from  motion 
pictures views and from actual observation.]: comp. Psycho!., 
7=265-284,  1927. 

205.  SiiERRINGTON,  n  s. "The Integrative Action of the Nervous Sys:. 
tem."  Cambridge:  Cambridge  Univ.  Press,  .:md  Ed.  433  pp., 
1947· 

206.  SHERRINGTON,  C.  S.  "Man  on His  Natuie;"  Cambridge:  Cam-

bridge  Univ.  Press,  413  pp.,  1941. 

. 

207.  SIEGEL,  A.  I.  Deprivation  of:usual  form .. definition  in  the  ring 
dove.  I.  Discriminatory  learning. J  comp:  physiol.  Psycho!., 
46:115-119,  1953· 

. 

2o8 . . SIMMONS,  F.  B., j. M.  EPLEYi R. C.  LUMMIS,  N. GUTTMAN,  L. S. 
FRISHKOPF,  L.  D.  I;IAR~ON,  E.  ZwiCKER.  Auditory  nerve: 
electrical stimulation in man.  &ience,  i48:to4-1.06,  1g65. 
209.  SKINNER,  B.  F.  "Walden Two."New Yqrk:. Macmillan, 1948. 
210.  SKINNER,  B.  F.  Freedom and the control •of ~en. Amer. Scholar, 

Special Issue,  25:47.,()5,  Winter,  1955-56. 

21 1.  SKINNER,  B. F~ The design  of cultures.  Daedalus,  pp.  534-546. 

Summer,  1961. 

212.  SouLAIRAC,  A.,  J.  CAHN,  and J . . CHAJU>ENTIER•  "Pain."  New 

York:  AcademicPress, 562  pp.,  1g68. 

213.  SPELT,  D.  K.  The conditioning of t11e  human  fetus  "in utero." 

J.  exp.  Psychol.,  38:33~346, 1948.  ·· 

214.  SPIEGEL,  E.  A.  and H. T. Wv~s •. Stirnulation of the brain stem 
and basal ganglia in man. Pp. 487-:-497  in: "Electrical stimula 
tion  of  the · Brain,"  D.  E.  Sheer,  (ed.f Austin:  Univ.  Texas 
Press, 641  pp.,  1961. 

215.  SPIEGEL,  E.  A.  and  H.  Wvc1s.  Stereoencephalotomy  (thalamot 
omy and related procedures).  Part I.  Methods and stereotaxic 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comBIBLIOGRAPHY 

atlas of the human brain.  New York:  Grune &:  Stratton,  Vol. 
I,  176  pp.,  1952. 

216.  SPIEGEL,  E.  A.  and  H.  T.  Wvc1s  (eds.).  Advances  in  stereo 
encephalotomy.  II.  Pain,  Convulsive  Disorders,  Behavioral 
and other effects of stereoencephalotomy.  Second Int. Sympo 
sium  on  Stereoencephalotomy.  Con£.  neurol.  (Basel),  27:456 
pp.,  1g66. 

217.  SPRAGUE,  J.  M.,  W.  W.  CHAMBERS,  and  E.  STELLAR.  Attentive, 
affective,  and adaptive behavior in  the cat.  Science,  133:165-
173,  1961. 

218.  STEVENS,  H.  A.  In:  Int.  Congr.  Sci.,  Copenhagen,  "Study  of 
Mental  Retardation," J.  Oster,  ed.,  Copenhagen:  Berlingske 
Bogtrykkeri, Vol.  1,  1964. 

219.  STUBBS,  E.  M.  The effect  of  the  factors  of duration,  intensity, 
and  pitch of sound stimuli  on  the  responses  of newborn  in 
fants.  Univ.  Iowa Stud.  Child Welfare,  9:75-135.  1934. 
220.  SWEET,  W. H. Pain. Pp. 459--506 in:  "Handbook of Physiology," 
Section  1:  Neurophysiology.  Vol.  1.  J.  Field,  H.  W.  Magoun, 
W.  E.  Hall  (eds.)  Washington,  D.C.:  Amer.  Physiol.  Soc., 
779 pp .•  1959· 

221.  SWEET,  W.  H.  Participant  in  "Brain  Stimulation  in  Behaving 
Subjects."  Neurosciences Research  Program  Workshop.  Dec., 
1966. 

222.  TAYLOR,  J.  H.  Innate  emotional  responses  in  infants.  Ohio 
State Univ.  Stud.,  Contrip.  Psycho!.,  No.  12:6g--81,  1934. 

223.  TEILHARD  DE  CHARDIN,  P.  "The  Phenomenon  of  Man."  New 

York:  Harper&: Row,  318  pp.,  1959. 

224.  TERZUOLO,  C.  A.  and W.  R. ADEY.  Sensorimotor cortical  activ 
ities.  Pp.  797-835  in:  "Handbook of  Physiology,"  Section  1: 
Neurophysiology, Vol.  II, J.  Field,  H.  W.  Magoun  and V.  E. 
Hall,  (eds.)  Baltimore,  Md.:  Waverly  Press,  pp.  781-1439• 
1960. 

225.  THOMAS,  A.  and S.  CHESS.  An approach  to  the study  of sources 
of  individual  differences  in  child  behavior.  J.  Clin.  exp. 
Psychopath.,  18:347-357,  1957. 

226.  TILNEY,  F.  and L.  CASAMAJOR.  Myelinogeny  as  applied  to  the 
study of behavior. Arch.  Neurol. Psychiat.  (Chicago),  12:1-66, 
1924· 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comBIBLIOGRAPHY 

227.  TINBERGEN,  N. Some  aspects  of in,stinct  and learning in  birds. 

Bioi.  hum. Affairs,  23:1-6,  1957. 

228.  TRACY;  H.  C.  The development of motility  and behavior  reac 
tions in the toadfish (Opsanus Tau). J. comp. Neurol., 40:253-
369,  1926. 

229.  UMBACH,  W.  Tiefen-und  Cortex-ableitungen  wiihrend  stereo. 
taktischer  Operationen  am  Mensdlen.  Brussels:  1st  int. 
Congr.  Neurosurg.,  t:I6h170,  1957. 

230.  VAN  BuREN,  J.  M.  Sensory,  motor  and  auti:momic  effects  of 
mesial  temporal  stimulati()n  in  man.  J. Neurosurg.,  18:273-
288,  1961. 

231.  VAN  BUREN,  J.  M.,  C.  L.  LI,  andG._A.OjEMANN.  The Ironto 
striatal  arrest  response  in  man.  EEG.  din.  Neurophysiol., 
21:114-130,  1966. 

232.  VoLTA,  A.  On  the  electricity  excited  by  the  mere  contact  of 
conducting  substances  of  different  kinds.  Phil.  Trans.,  go: 
403-431,  1800. 

233·  WALTER,  W.  G.  and  H.  J.  CRow.  Depth  recording  from  the 
human  brain.  EEG din.  Neurophysiol.,  16:68-72,  1964. 
234·  WALTER,  W.  G.  Participant in "Brain Stimulation in Behaving 
Subjects."  Neurosciences  Research  Program Workshop,  Dec., 
1966. 

235·  WARREN,  H. C.  "Dictionary of Psychology."  Cambridge,  Mass.: 

Houghton  Mifflin,  372  pp.,  1934. 

236.  WATSON,  J.  R  "Animal Education:  An Experimental Study on 
the Psychical Development of the White Rat, Correlated with 
the  Growth  of its  Nervous  System."  Chicago:  Univ.  Chicago 
Press,  122  pp.,  1903. 

237·  WATSON,  J.  B.  "Psychology from  the Standpoint of a  Behavior 

ist."  Philadelphia:  Lippincott,  429  pp.,  1919. 

238.  Webster's  Dictionary.  "Webster's  Third  New  International 
Dictionary."  Springfield,  Mass.:  G.  &  C.  Merriam,  2662  pp., 
1961. 

239·  WEILL,  G.  and  C.  PFERSDORFF.  Les  functions  visuelles  de 
l'aveugle-ne  opere.  Ann.  med.-psychol.,  93:  Part  2,  367-382, 
1935· 

240.  WEISS,  A.  P.  The  measurement  of  infant  behavior.  Psycho!. 

Rev.,  36:453-471,  1929. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comBIBLIOGRAPHY 

241.  WEISS,  P.  Self-differentiation of the  basic  patterns of coordina 

tion. Comp.  Psycho!.  Monogr.,  17:g6 pp.,  1941. 

242.  WEiss,  P. The growth of science:  its liberating force  and limita 
tion.  Pp . . 6o-69  in:  "The  Knowledge  Explosion.  Liberation 
and Limitation."  F.  Sweeney,  (ed.)  New  York:  Farrar,  Straus 
&  Giro.ux,  1g66. 

243·  WERTHEIMER,  M.  Hebb and Senden on the  role  of learning in 

perception. Amer. J.  Psychol.,  64:133-137,  1951. 

244·  WEST,  L. J. Psychiatry, "brainwashing," and the American char 

acter.  Amer. J.  Psychiat.,  uo:842-85o,  1g64. 

245·  WoLFENSBERGER,  W. Ethical issues in research with human sub 

jects. Science,  155:47-51,  1967. 

246.  World  Medical  Association.  Human  experinlentation  code  of 

ethics.  Declaration of Helsinki.  Brit.  med.  J.,  2:177,  1964. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.comAbout  the  Author 
Jose  M.  R.  Delgado was  born in Ronda, §pain, and 
received  his  medical trai11ing  at  Madrid  University, 
where  he  was  Associate  Professor  of  Physiology  UJ'ltil 
1950  when  he  came  to  Yale  University  to  work  with 
Dr. John Fulton. Heis now Professor of P}lysiology at 
Yale,  where he has developed  techniques for electrical 
and chemical stimulation of the brain ·a11d  has applied 
them  to  the  study  of  primate  and  htlll1an  behavior. 
He has published more  th~n 200 scientHic  papers and 
is a well-known authority in neurQ-'behavioral r~arch. 

About  the Editor of this ·• Series 
Ruth  Nanda Anshen,  philosopher and editor,  plans 
and  edits  World  Perspectives,  Religious  Perspectives, 
Credo  Perspectives,  Perspectives  in  Humanz'sm  and 
The Science  of Culture Series.  She also writes  and lec 
tures  on  the  relationship of knowledge to  the  nature 
and meaning of man and existence. 

http:/www.propheticexplorer.com